Contemplating stones Afterword
Regular readers will know that stones are mentioned many times in our various articles and books in several different connections. So we thought it might be interesting to hunt up a few of the references to them, to see what other truths they have to teach us.

"...each action is like the ripple caused by a stone thrown in the middle of the ocean: these ripples extend and spread in every direction, affecting the whole of that ocean. You will therefore see that there is no such thing as isolation for any being whatsoever. All are part of the Whole, and their actions influence the whole Universe by means of these spreading ripples, just as they are influenced in turn by the ripples, or vibrations, set in motion by all other beings."

(The Quest of Ruru)

The Bible tells us that: "To him that overcometh, I will give a white stone," which is a seminal, spiritual Salt, "the centre of water, wherein metals ought to die", as Paracelsus tells us.

(The Magic of Salt)

"In the cavern of the metals there is hidden the Stone that is venerable, splendid in colour, a mind sublime, and an open sea." The Six Keys of Eudoxus goes on to tell us that this stone: "has a bright glittering: it contains a Spirit of a sublime original; it is the Sea of the Wise, in which they angle for their mysterious Fish." Hermes adds: "Behold, I have declared that which had been concealed, since the work is both with you and about you."

(Alchemy: origins, transmutation, study, practise and science)

"And the Fifth Gate is called 'The Gate of Love'; and this is smaller still, and the Path that leads to it is hard and thorny, and many stones lie on the way, sharp stones and hard, and the traveller along this Path hath many falls."

(The True Gospel of Chrishna-Jeseus: chapter 30)

"The Earth is but a stepping stone to higher things, and thus it should indeed be ever regarded, to be discarded when its purpose is fulfilled."

(The True Gospel of Chrishna-Jeseus: chapter 22)