Cosmic Life
Afterword by Occult Mysteries
Our afterword has been adapted from Vision 8—The Kosmos—of The Golden Star. We previously used some parts of this chapter in the afterword to our article on 'Why matter matters' (see further reading list below), but now draw on those which have a bearing on the themes discussed by Paul G. Vaughan in his article.
In Vision 8 we are told that our entire Solar System, and the whole of our Milky Way galaxy too, is contained within what occult science calls the 'Auric Envelope.' Beyond this electro-magnetic shield there are countless Universes without end, so unimaginably many, and so vast, that it is impossible to conceive their existence or their nature. There literally is no end to Eternity or to Boundless Space.

It is this Auric Envelope which insulates all that is contained within it from external influences—spiritual and material—in exactly the same way as the human aura acts as a barrier against such forces and conditions, good, bad and indifferent. This Auric Envelope, in the case of human beings, can be opened at will, and then it can allow entrance to any forces or conditions with which the mind within the human body wishes to come en rapport.

When the aura is kept in a closed condition by an effort of the Will, it can keep at bay all thought-forms, mental images from outside sources, or spiritual inspirations, whether good or bad. By opening the aura we can let in light or darkness, good or bad influences, and this applies in the macrocosm too—the Solar System which, as we said just now, is also surrounded by its own aura—the Auric Envelope.

This explains how viruses, as well as other living organisms, may penetrate the Aura of a man, a planet, or an entire Solar System. Hence the Hermetic axiom 'as above, so below,' is a true one that applies to the microcosm as well as the macrocosm. Minerals live, suffer from communicable diseases and reproduce their own kind. Crystals move and exhibit generative processes similar to those of plants; and they can be poisoned. These facts of nature have been known to occult science for thousands of years but have only recently been recognised by material science as it probes ever deeper in to the mysteries of the origin of life.

In The Secret Doctrine, published over 130 years ago, we may read: "the Mother is the fiery Fish of Life, She scatters her Spawn and the Breath (motion) heats and quickens it. The Grains (of Spawn) are soon attracted to each other and form the Curds in the Ocean (of Space). The larger lumps coalesce and receive new Spawn—in fiery Dots, Triangles and Cubes, which ripen, and at the appointed time some of the Lumps detach themselves and assume spheroidal form, a process which they effect only when not interfered with by the others. After which the Secret Law comes into operation. Motion (Breath) becomes the Whirlwind and sets them into rotation" (Volume 1, page 97).

Here, in a few lines, is a succinct summary of the origins of life and the formation of the Universe which puts the 'Big Bang' theory of science in the shade. The language is deliberately metaphorical and allegorical, but in terms like 'Fish', 'Spawn' and 'Curds' we can discern the agglomerations of matter which lead to the formation of the comets ('fiery fish') suns, planets and galaxies of the macrocosm and the electrons, atoms, amino acids and cells of the microcosm.

From this we may deduce that life as material science understands it—or rather, only partially and erroneously understands it—may have begun on planets so infinitely minute that they become as awesome as the largest star in space. And whilst the majestic march of time passes, there are born the minute specks that will foregather and combine to form ever larger and more complex life-forms.

In the blood of animals there swarm multitudes of living entities. Four-and-a-half million tiny red cells, with lots of room to spare float in the fluid of a cubic millimetre of our blood! On a square millimetre are crowded a million bacteria, each measuring about one micron in diameter.

Two-thousand million bacteria are normally present in a single teaspoonful of soil. It has been calculated that a handful of this marvellous stuff which some people disparagingly refer to as 'dirt' contains more living creatures than all the human beings who have ever lived on Earth—a truly staggering thought.

The amoeba is one of nature's simplest organisms, yet shares many common features with nature's most advanced beings—us! There are trillions of these single-celled marvels distributed throughout the natural world. With no known shape of their own, they are like specks of living jelly; crawling about in their own peculiar amorphous manner, and extending any part of their bodies to enwrap particles of food. When in a resting condition in fluids they are spherical in form.

Every human being or other mammal starts life as a single cell, the mammalian single-celled embryo being formed by the fusion of a male sperm-cell with a female egg. This has one nucleus, and when the nucleus and the cell which contains it divide into two, the halves are nearly—but not quite—identical.

The microbial cell is not only capable of independent existence, but can reproduce itself by division: by dividing they multiply. Science does not yet know in detail what it is that induces microbial cells to double themselves by division. Nor does it know why some of these minute life-forms have remained virtually unchanged for billions of years.

One reason for this ignorance on the part of science is that it knows nothing of the occult elemental forces, under direct control of intelligent Entities, who build and mould, form and alter, and who have the secrets of all these living wonders in their charge. Wonders that include viruses which science now believes may be the oldest living organisms on Earth and the longest lived.

Viruses are generally defined as particulate bodies capable of causing infectious disease in animals or plants, but there is much more to these sophisticated life-forms as science is only now discovering. It is only during the last fifty years that we have been able to see viruses at all thanks to the development of instruments like scanning electron microscopes (SEM); nor is there any known filter through which many of them cannot pass.

Whereas plants and animals die, viruses are potentially immortal. They only die by some violent death from a cause outside themselves. The reason is that viruses have nothing in common with the complex processes of reproduction and recapitulation that are undergone by higher animals, plants and many bacteria. Viruses have nothing to recapitulate, being already at the lowest stage of evolution, but this does not mean they are primitive organisms nor that they lack intelligence, however primitive.

It may seem a leap too far to credit viruses with intelligence, but we know of no other quality that adequately explains their prodigious ability to remake themselves and so escape detection and destruction. Viruses are in a league of their own when it comes to mutation, as science calls the ability to rapidly evolve and adapt to changing hosts and different environments.

As we saw in Paul G. Vaughan's article, viruses present material science with many difficulties and surprises. Some scientists argue that viruses are just non-living bits of DNA and RNA, while others believe they are not only very much alive, but that they emerged before the first cells. Recent findings challenge the notion that viruses are only parasites that depend on their hosts to proliferate. The discovery of giant viruses, which were first misinterpreted as bacteria, are providing new insights into how cells could have evolved during the early history of the Earth.

One of the most fascinating aspects of viruses is the discovery of bacteriophages during the late nineteenth century (see illustration below). These remarkable organisms are small, virus-like organisms composed of a protein capsule around an RNA or DNA genome. Their ability to replicate inside bacteria means they can and are used to fight disease—not cause it as the coronaviruses do.

bacteriophage
The structure of bacteriophages, or phages as they are more generally called, is still not well understood by science. Most bacteriophages have a 'head', central shaft or 'body' and appendages which look remarkably like legs. These legs attach themselves to bacteria, allowing the phage to inject genetic material through the shaft into the host cell, where it replicates and reassembles into its 'children'!

As we said earlier, viruses can never die. Some scientists dispute this by saying they aren't alive in the first place, while others say just the opposite. As science does not know what life is in the ultimate it is not surprising that it can't decide whether viruses are alive or not. Occult science, as many of our readers will know, takes a very different view of 'life' and 'death.'

We would argue that by any sensible definition, any organism that can affect any other organism (such as a virus invading a cell to cause influenza) is very much 'alive', just as a seemingly 'dead' body is alive owing to the activity of vast numbers of living organisms from worms, through insects and plants, to the billions of bacteria, all busily at work breaking it down into its constituent elements.

So—as we said in our introduction—viruses are one of the most intriguing of all 'occult' mysteries which—so far as material science is concerned—may well conceal the key to how life arrived on Earth from outer space. How it got there in the first place is a greater mystery still which we doubt science will ever solve as it would require recognition of the existence of Spirit—a step too far for most scientists to even contemplate, never mind essay.