Fairy-Tales unveiled
Many people assume fairy-tales were composed during the 16th and 17th centuries from oral folk tales and mythology
At best they are regarded as of limited cultural interest and at worst as improbable stories fit only for impressionable children. Tales of magic and wonder to occupy the simple-minded mites for an idle hour or two, while their parents get on with important things in the so-called 'real world'. In this afterword we shall try to discover what truth there is in these assumptions.

Let us deal with the question of age first. Fairy-tales—or more properly, folk tales—are as old as Man. We find them in every country of the world at all times of human history. According to a study published in 2016 by Dr Jamie Tehrani and a team of researchers from Durham University, such stories may date back more than 6,000 years. This research, conducted with fellow academics from the New University of Lisbon, in Portugal, found that Jack and the Beanstalk could be traced back more than 5,000 years. Other research showed that the well-known Beauty and the Beast and Rumpelstiltskin were at least 4,000 years old.

It is noteworthy that the oldest story the researchers at Durham University discovered was a European folk tale known as The Smith and the Devil, which is thought to be at least 6,000 years old. This proves, if proof were needed, that Magic is as old as man and that there has never been a time when ambitious human beings did not seek supernatural aid to realise their desires. In all versions of the tale a smith sells his soul to an evil spirit in exchange for magical powers. In one version, the smith acquires the magical ability to join any material together, which he cunningly uses to weld the evil spirit to an immovable object, so neatly avoiding having to pay the devil his due!

The Brothers Grimm, whose 19th century collections of fairy-tales have never been bettered, believed that many of the stories they wrote down which have since become world famous, such as Red Riding Hood, Cinderella and Snow White, were rooted in a shared cultural history dating back to the birth of the Indo-European family of languages which began with Sanskrit. We agree, though we would put that date much earlier than a mere 6,000 years ago, for Sanskrit is a direct development of Senzar—the language of the initiates—once spoken among the sages of the principal nation of Atlantis, from whence it was carried all over the world as H. P. Blavatsky tells us in The Secret Doctrine.

Later thinkers challenged the beliefs of the Brothers Grimm, maintaining that many of the stories they collected were no older than 16th and 17th Centuries, resulting in the prevailing view that fairy-tales are of comparatively recent origin. Some may well be, but this does not do away with the fact, now proven by the work of the anthropologists at the Universities of Durham and New Lisbon, that the genre itself is very much older. The fact that fairy-tales were already well-established in ancient Greece and Rome and are extant in many Greek and Latin texts, argues convincingly for their very great antiquity.

We have now seen how incredibly old fairy-tales are and that they were never intended for children, but adults. The fairy-tales we know from our childhood are all didactic and each has a moral or ethical message. This is true of Brier Rose, Cinderella, Red Riding Hood, Hansel and Gretel and Snow White, to name but a few of the most well-known stories. Now, the only institutions capable of teaching morality and ethics 6,000 years ago in Europe were the Mystery Schools of Greece and the Druidic Colleges of Britain, France and Ireland.

This leads to the surprising conclusion that fairy-tales, or at least a considerable number of the oldest ones, may be the more or less fragmentary remains of the Mystery Teachings and Ancient Wisdom, carefully preserved for posterity under glyph and symbol, allegory and myth. The need to do so would have become even more urgent during the early centuries of our era when the emerging Christian Church threatened to obliterate all traces of the hated Pagan Mysteries, as John Temple has discussed in his article on the facts and fictions of the Church.

This at once answers the objection that is often hurled against secrecy in occultism and applies equally well to the teachings of the Mystery Religion which found their way into fairy-tales. But fear of the depredations of the Church in its relentless war against the so-called 'heresies' which threatened its temporal power and spiritual supremacy was not the only reason occult truths were disguised under the cloak of allegory and symbolism within many fairy-tales. Another reason was that to spell out certain teachings and practises in plain words was to invite them to be misunderstood and misused by the unready and unworthy.

We have alluded to this in several of our articles, but it is worth repeating that then, as now, none of the truly great secrets of occultism or magic have ever been written down in such a way that anyone could understand them. But there is a third reason for using fairy-tales to preserve occult truths and that is to save time. One can convey a whole body of meaning in a simple, short allegorical and symbolical narrative that it would take several large books to communicate literally, as we have discussed in our article about Symbolism.

We said earlier that the occult truths concealed in fairy-tales can be traced back to the Mystery Schools of Greece, but they probably go back even further to ancient Egypt, India and many other ancient seats of religious learning. When these schools declined and it was feared that their teachings might be lost forever, attempts were made to preserve them in various ways. One way was to encode them in symbols and allegories only the initiated could decipher. But when the initiates themselves began to die out through persecution what remained of the Ancient Wisdom was concealed in folk-tales.

These stories quickly spread abroad amongst the common people who cherished them for their lively narratives, thrilling plots and magical character, innocently unaware of the profound occult teachings concealed within them. This not only ensured the survival of the Ancient Wisdom—or a least fragments of it—especially during the early centuries of the Christian era when the fanatical leaders of the Church sought to lay their despoiling hands on every last shred of the hated Pagan religions, but also preserved it largely intact over a period of thousands of years.

This is an astonishing achievement of which very few are aware and even fewer comprehend the implications of. But all the ancient initiates had done was to follow the tried and tested methods of their predecessors by hiding occult knowledge and truth in plain sight. In this way they also defeated the enemies of truth, amongst which the Church was by no means the only opponent who, lacking the keys to the secrets encoded in fairy-tales, saw no reason to restrict their circulation.

We must not assume from this that all fairy-tales conceal occult truths. There must always have existed folk-tales with no hidden meaning at all—simple narratives with an ethical aim in view, such as we find in Aesop's Fables. Those fairy-tales which do contain occult teachings, such as Sleeping Beauty, also known as Brier Rose, are invariably of great antiquity, whilst others, such as Hans Andersen's The Emperor's New Clothes, are of modern origin. From this we may conjecture that the ancient initiates either took existing folk-tales and re-cast them in their own way or invented new ones. Sleeping Beauty is an example of the former whilst Apuleius' Cupid and Psyche found in his Metamorphoses, is an example of the latter, for Lucius Apuleius was an initiate of the Greek Mysteries and a Neoplatonic philosopher.

Brier Rose, mentioned earlier, and —immortalised by Disney as Sleeping Beauty in their animated feature film of 1959—is a thinly disguised allegory for the Higher and lower selves we discuss in the first of our occult studies course articles on the path to the Light. Rumpelstiltskin, on the other hand, contains so many layers of hidden meaning it is quite impossible to do justice to it in this short afterword. Fortunately, Erika Hahn has saved us the trouble by contributing a superb analysis of this and two other well-known fairy-tales in her article on the Hidden Wisdom in Fairy-tales which we published in June 2022. See Further reading list at the end of this sidebar.

The discerning reader will have deduced that the Princess and her shadow in Erika Hahn's allegorical tale stand for the two selves—the Higher and the lower. In addition, the story contains further symbols, such as the candle (spiritual light), the garden (a higher realm), prayer as a metaphor for study and meditation, and of course, the cellar itself, which has many meanings. It stands for the material world, the physical body, and the traps and pitfalls the lower self lays for us to keep us in ignorance of any higher reality. But study the tale yourself and see what else you can find within it.

Those unfamiliar with allegory and symbolism will find much useful information in our Further Reading list below and in the note which concludes Erika Hahn's story.