Allegory explained
Afterword by Occult Mysteries
We have discussed allegory in several of our articles, principally in the commentary to the occult symbolism in Mozart's opera of The Magic Flute. Erika Hahn's fairy-tale provides us with the opportunity to say a little more. The dictionary tells us that an allegory is a story, poem, or picture that can be interpreted to reveal a hidden meaning. To which we would add music too, for that too can be allegorical, as we find in Mozart's opera, as well as the works of many other truly inspired composers.

In Sheridan's 18th century comic drama The Rivals, Mrs Malaprop wrongly uses words which don't have the meaning she intends. In one scene she castigates the aptly-named Lydia Languish, a wealthy, empty-headed young heiress: "Oh, there's nothing to be hoped for from her! She's as headstrong as an allegory on the banks of Nile!" The joke is that she meant to say 'alligator', though to an occultist, the River Nile itself is an allegory worthy of deep study, which symbolised the great river of the Milky Way in the Heavens to the ancient Egyptians, as well as the source of Life, in much the same way as the River Ganges did and does to Indians.

Moreover, an alligator, whether on the banks of the Nile (where it is more properly called a crocodile) or in a Florida swamp, is also an allegory which features prominently in the ancient Egyptian Mythos as an emblem of both Good and Evil, as well as a mixture of these two great principles, as some of our readers will know. In one of his guises, the God Horus was depicted with the head of a crocodile—Sebek-Horus—the great Fish, who plunges into the Nile in search of his prey. This too is a compound allegory for the search for Truth in the muddy waters of earthly life and the doctrine of reincarnation, whether we regard the 'prey' of the God as the enemies of Truth and Righteousness who fight against the Light, the hard lessons of life on earth, or the mysterious 'fish of the wise' mentioned in some alchemical writings, which of course is a concealed reference to spiritual truths, laws and principles of various kinds.

The crocodile was also associated with the lower self in Egypt, and it is not difficult to see why when we consider what a ferocious and greedy creature it is, and its well-known habit of lying in wait for its victims, to suddenly seize them in its gaping maws when least expected. We mention these two aspects of the crocodile to show you that the zootypes which the ancient Sages choose to symbolise various laws, principles, natural facts, etc., were often of a compound nature; neither good nor evil per se, but capable of both interpretations, depending on the particular aspect of the Mystery Teachings they were intended to portray. It is for this reason, as we point out in several of our articles, that it is impossible to say dogmatically that this or that symbol means the same under all possible conditions.

The same is true of myths and legends which can be interpreted in many different ways and from different aspects. This is a serious stumbling-block for those who fondly imagine they can learn the science of symbolism and allegory in a month or two! So study Erika Hahn's fairy-tale well, for there is much more concealed in it than you may realise at first glance.