Hidden Wisdom in Fairy-Tales
Afterword by Occult Mysteries
Fairy-tales are generally regarded as fit only for children, having no connection with the 'real' world adults inhabit and think they know so well! But this is a comparatively recent attitude, which was not shared by Hans Christian Andersen, who when he learnt that a statue planned to commemorate him would have children clustering around him, wrote: "my blood boiled and I spoke my mind in no uncertain terms." His aim, he added, "was to be a poet for all ages," and so we regard him, and a most gifted one too.

Yet it is true that children, when not corrupted by adult cynicism and worldly cleverness, enjoy Fairy-tales. This is because their minds are so much closer to the Heavenly Realms they have so recently left to incarnate on earth, and they still retain the memories of that blissful state.

Whilst there is no evidence that Hans Christian Andersen ever had any direct involvement with occult teachings, the fact remains that several of his stories do contain much occult lore. Much the same could be said of J R R Tolkien, who, in many of his books and stories displays a deep understanding of Nature and her hidden laws. Although there is no evidence that he was ever directly involved with occultism either, there are many passages in his books which might have been written by an Initiate. Unless we accept that memory does not reside in the brain, but in the Higher Self, the occult knowledge of which Tolkien had no conscious awareness in his present life displayed in the following verse, remains inexplicable.

"Still round the corner there may wait
A new road or a secret gate,
And though we pass them by today,
Tomorrow we may come this way,
And take the hidden paths that run
Towards the Moon or to the Sun."
These enigmatical lines make concealed reference to the mysteries of the Sun and Moon, as well as the secrets of reincarnation and evolution. This shows that the inspired poet and visionary, under the afflatus of Divine enthusiasm, is able to reach out to the Higher Realms and receive the very highest truths from the dwellers there. It is interesting to note that a mysterious visitor to Tolkien's home is said to have asked the bemused poet: "you don't really think YOU wrote all those stories, do you?" We do not know the poet's reply but may conjecture that the question gave him much food for thought! You can read more about the esotericism in The Lord of the Rings in our three-part article about J R R Tolkien.

Fairy-tales are very ancient indeed. Just how ancient we would not conjecture to say. They are found universally, and we incline to the opinion that many of them are the scattered fragments of the Ancient Mystery Teachings, which over the long course of time, have been transformed into fable and myth. There is no country or nation on earth which does not possess its store of such tales, which in their re-telling have attracted such a thick crust of fantasy and embellishment that the occult truths they conceal have become almost invisible to all but the very few. Many of these stories are so old that it is impossible to say when they were first recorded. Such are the stories of princesses being imprisoned or cast into sleep.

Here we have a clear allusion to the imprisonment of the Soul (Higher Self) in the body and the forgetfulness of its former Divine state. In Andersen's The Snow Queen we find so many occult truths concealed under the cloak of allegory and symbolism that it would be possible to write a large book about them. As we have neither the time nor inclination to do ALL our readers' work for them, a few examples must suffice.

The author divides his story into seven parts: a most significant number as many of you will know. The first part describes the creation of a distorting mirror by the devil which had the strange power of making anything good or beautiful reflected in it appear horrid, whilst all that is evil and worthless seemed attractive. Could one find a better description of the topsy-turvy, wrongside-uppermost nature of this illusory world? Andersen does not name this mirror, but we will and call it the 'astral light'. Like his fictional mirror, the astral light distorts everything reflected in it.

Andersen's mirror is shattered into "millions and billions" of pieces, which are scattered all over the world. In the same way does the astral light mirror the thoughts of mankind, with the difference that it reflects both evil and good, so influencing us in either way, or direction. In the second part of the story, two splinters from the mirror enter into the eyes and heart of a little boy, Kai, and from then on he regards the world with the cynicism and worldly cleverness we referred to earlier, and is much admired for it. In just this way does the lower self blind our eyes and harden our heart. Need we enlarge on this?

Kai now hitches his little sled to the sled of the Snow Queen. In this we may read an allegory of the man or woman who, forsaking the path to the light, turns to the darkness, be that darkness merely blindness to all higher influences and thoughts, or conscious or unconscious cooperation with evil in any form. The Snow Queen may also be regarded as an emblem of the Moon, that white, cold, dead world, whose influence on mankind is on the whole not a good one, as we may read in The Secret Doctrine in which the nature of our mysterious satellite is discussed in great depth. As if to confirm our interpretation, at the end of this part, Andersen writes: "The Moon came out, and into its large and clear disk Kai stared all through the long winter night. When daytime came he fell asleep at the feet of the Snow Queen."

The third, fourth and fifth parts of the story concentrate on Kai's sister, Gerda and her search for her lost brother. The different landscapes through which Gerda travels and the strange folk she encounters have a very otherworldly feel about them, as if we are now in another dimension. And so we are, though Andersen does not tell us as much. Gerda's journey shares many elements with the mystical search of the soul (Higher Self in our terminology) for enlightenment and liberation. This is a familiar theme in both fairy-tales and mythology such as we can find in the legend of Ishtar who descends into the underworld to rescue her lover, Tammuz, which story is at least 3,000 years old.

In the sixth part, Gerda learns that Kai is in the Snow Queen's palace and quite satisfied with his lot, thinking it is the best place in the world. This of course, is the effect of the slivers of the distorting mirror which are lodged in his heart and eyes. The allegory could not be any plainer; the Higher Self blinded and bound fast in the web of illusion and ignorance. We find the same theme in Plato's Allegory of the Cave, proving the antiquity of all these recurring themes of loss, imprisonment, seeking and finally liberation.

In the final part we are told that the Snow Queen's throne was placed in the middle of a frozen lake which she called the Mirror of Reason, which had "cracked into thousands of pieces", every one of which "was shaped exactly like all the others." This is not such a bad description of cold, hard intellect which can never solve the great mysteries of life and death no matter how many pieces of the puzzle it broods over, for they are shaped exactly like all the others! This confirms the occult truth that all material things, without exception, are derived from one substance, the nature of which the unaided intellect can never know.

We now learn that Kai is "...almost black from the cold; but he did not feel it..." This is the condition of every materialist, embedded in the web of ignorance. Poor little Kai, having lost all recollection of his true, Divine nature, was now completely blind and deaf to all the higher sensibilities and emotions. Another of God's lost children, vainly trying to "put the pieces of ice together in such a way that they formed a certain word, but he could not remember exactly what that word was," as Andersen poignantly explains. That word, says Andersen was 'Eternity'. We might call it 'God'—for they are the same and mean the same.

Perhaps Andersen had this same thought in his mind when he wrote the story; we cannot say. The name of the highest Deity in ancient Egypt was 'Heh', or 'Hehi', which means eternity and everlastingness. And what is more eternal and everlasting than God? The Snow Queen tells Kai that if he can put the pieces of ice together to spell the word she does not name, then he would be his own master and she would give him the whole world. Can we doubt it? For once we become fully conscious of our inheritance as sons or daughters of God we embrace eternity and all that it encompasses. The 'world', meaning this earth, and the heavens above and below will then be at our feet, for we shall have risen up to the dwelling of the Eternal and be true masters of ourselves and our destiny.

Finally Gerda finds Kai, and the warmth of her tears falling on his breast melts the icy splinter within his heart; his eyes open and memory is restored to him. This holy moment comes to all sincere seekers after Truth. It is different for each one of us, but however it manifests, once the scales have fallen from our eyes how glorious is the Light they behold! Here we must leave The Snow Queen and end our brief glimpse into the hidden truths in fairy-tales. We hope we have encouraged you to read and study such tales for yourself. Not only will you find this enjoyable and uplifting but instructive and profitable too.

We published a new article by Erika Hahn on the hidden wisdom in fairy-tales in June 2022. See link below.