Hypatia
Afterword by the author
Some readers may assume my story is inspired by the life of Hypatia, the Greek philosopher foully murdered by a fanatical Christian mob in 415 A.D. Although I am familiar with her tragic life and cruel death, the Divine Lady is not Hypatia. Nor is she Madame Blavatsky or any other famous historical figure. Nonetheless, Hypatia—who might have rivalled Pythagoras' fame had her writings survived the blood-stained hands of the Christian Church—is worthy of being better known, and that is why I have written this brief biography.

Hypatia was born around 370 A.D. into the Roman elite and educated by her father Theon, famed far beyond the empire for his mathematical genius. She easily eclipsed all the scholars of her own time with her achievements in mathematics and philosophy. At the young age of 30 she became head of the Neoplatonist school in Alexandria, where she taught students from every corner of the empire the beauty of Virtue and Truth and the virtue and truth of Beauty. She attracted Christians and Pagans alike to her lectures, making friends of both. Although sympathetic to the new religion, her influence and popularity caused envy among the hierarchy of the Church, and earned her the enmity of the Bishop.

For Hypatia, mathematics was not the mechanistic science it has since become but rather the sacred science of numbers. Like Pythagoras before her, she taught that number was the basis of all manifestation and order in the universe, while Geometry was the tool for understanding the relationship between matter and spirit. To her, as to her predecessors in esoteric philosophy, astronomy and astrology, mathematics and magic, art and music, formed one, grand science. All this was quite enough for the leaders of the early Church to accuse her of sorcery and witchcraft.

Until the time of Constantine, Romans practiced religious syncretism—the blending of various belief systems and deities from distant parts of the empire. Every citizen was free to worship whatever gods or goddesses. This often resulted in two or more deities from separate systems being merged into a new god or goddess. Serapis was a popular example of this—an amalgamation of the Graeco-Roman Zeus with the Egyptian Osiris.

Serapis was the presiding god of Alexandria, and his temple, the Serapeum, housed the remains of the famous Library partially destroyed by Julius Caesar nearly 500 years earlier. Still considered one of the wonders of the ancient world, it was one of the two most important bastions of Pagan philosophy, religion and culture in Alexandria; the other being Hypatia herself. Both were threatened by the rising power and influence of the Church which had been vastly increased by the adoption of Christianity as the state religion by the Emperor Constantine a century earlier.

Although known today as 'the Great,' this was not a view shared by Constantine's contemporaries, one of whom wrote: "Now that the whole empire had fallen into the hands of Constantine, he no longer conceals his evil disposition and vicious inclinations, but acts as he pleases."

Among his many crimes were the murder of his son, Crispus, and later his wife, Fausta, whom he locked in an overheated bath to literally boil to death. According to Zosimus, none of the pagan priests to whom he applied was willing to absolve him of these sins, saying: "there was no kind of lustration that was sufficient to clear him of such enormities." Accustomed to worshipping as they pleased, many Romans were horrified that the same gods who had protected and blessed them for centuries were now cursed as demons by their emperor.

In contrast to the syncretism which had prevailed for centuries, Constantine promoted the rigid monotheism of a jealous and angry god. This still has its adherents within the Church today, as John Temple has pointed out in several of his articles on the Search for Truth. Constantine's nephew Julian, a staunch opponent of Christianity which earned him the epithet 'the Apostate' after his death, regarded his uncle as a "criminal revolutionary who destroyed traditional religious values in order to salve a loaded conscience, a tyrant with the mind of a banker."

This was the religious climate into which Hypatia was born. The fifth century Greek historian Eunapius described the Christian monks in Alexandria as "men in appearance but who led the lives of swine, and openly did and allowed countless unspeakable crimes." The Greek orator Libanius wrote to Emperor Theodosius in 386 to complain about the monks' brutality in the following words: "They [the monks] hasten to attack the temple....utter desolation follows, with the stripping of roofs, demolition of walls, the tearing down of statues and the overthrow of altars....the priests [pagan priests of the sanctuary] must either keep quiet or die."

In the year 412, Cyril succeeded his uncle Theophilus as Bishop of Alexandria. Among his first acts was to inflame tensions between Christians and Jews, resulting in violence on both sides. The Jewish population of Alexandria that had flourished since the time of Alexander the Great was exiled from the city as Cyril closed all the synagogues.

It was about this time that Alexandria acquired a new prefect—Orestes. A moderate Christian, affluent and erudite, he bridged the gap between the ancient world of Greek thought and the new order of Christian philosophy. He formed an immediate and warm friendship with Hypatia who remained one of his leading supporters and advisers until her death.

Orestes was so infuriated by Cyril's expulsion of the Jews that he wrote to the emperor to complain. In a half-hearted attempt at reconciliation, Cyril presented Orestes with a copy of the New Testament—then newly produced—and asked him to accept its truth and resolve their differences. Orestes recognised this was a crude attempt to publicly show his subservience to the bishop and refused the toxic gift. The enraged bishop retaliated by summoning five hundred monks to harass the prefect.

They surrounded Orestes as he rode through the city and publicly accused him of Paganism. He countered this calumny by telling them he had been baptised by the bishop of Constantinople. This did not prevent one of the monks from throwing stones at the prefect which injured him. After his own guards deserted him, Orestes was rescued by a crowd of moderate Christians who drove off the monks, capturing the one who had attacked him. Orestes sentenced the perpetrator to torture. Never one to miss an opportunity to strike back at the prefect, when the monk died of his injuries, Cyril declared him a martyr!

The feud between them escalated until, between 414-15, Orestes formed his own political party. He was backed by the few Jews who had remained in the city, government officials who were moderate Christians like himself; and the Alexandrian elite which included Hypatia. Cyril, lacking both powerful friends and political influence, resorted to the time-honoured ploy of inciting rumours that Hypatia was a witch who had beguiled Orestes.

A contemporary Christian fanatic wrote: "in those days there appeared in Alexandria a female philosopher, a pagan named Hypatia, and she was devoted at all times to magic, astrolabes, and instruments of music, and she beguiled many people through her Satanic wiles. The governor of the city [Orestes] honoured her exceedingly; for she had beguiled him through her magic, and he ceased attending church as had been his custom."

The slander had the desired effect. The monks ambushed Hypatia as she was travelling through the city, tortured and murdered her. The philosophical school she had founded was closed and any Pagan philosophers who valued their lives fled the city. Orestes disappeared without trace, either recalled from his post by the emperor or defecting out of fear that he would share the same fate as his friend.

All of Hypatia's writings were lost and it would take many long centuries before the sublime philosophical and mathematical truths she espoused saw the light of day once more. As for Cyril, he was given the rare title of "Doctor of the Church" and canonized as a saint in later times!