Iamblichus
Our customary afterword consists of an abridged article by the Neoplatonist and Theosophist scholar Alexander Wilder (1823-1909) about Iamblichus and the correspondence which forms the subject of this investigation. This is followed by a brief biography of the author.
Iamblichus is described as scholarly, but not original in his views. His manner of life was exemplary, and he was frugal in his habits. He lacked the eloquence of Plotinus, yet excelled him in popularity. He belonged to a noble family, and received the most liberal education that could be obtained. He pursued the study of mathematics and philosophy under Anatolios, probably the bishop of that name who had himself delivered philosophic lectures at Alexandria as a follower of Aristotle.

After this Iamblichus became a disciple of Porphyry in Rome, and succeeded to his place in the School of his teacher. Many of his works are now lost. He wrote expositions of the doctrines of Plato and Aristotle, a treatise on the Soul, and another to demonstrate the virtues and potencies existing in the statues and symbols of the gods. Another work treated of the Chaldean Theology. The loss of this volume is much to be regretted. The religion of the Chaldeans was largely astronomical as well as mystical, and its creed could be read in the heavens.

The science denominated Mathematics, including geometry and astronomy, was a part of the system, and all problems of genesis and evolution were wrought out by it. The philosophy of Pythagoras was modelled from it, and the Rabbinic learning was Chaldean in its origin. It has been repeatedly suggested that the Mosaic book of Genesis was a compilation from the same literature, and capable of being interpreted accordingly.

Iamblichus also wrote a Life of Pythagoras which was translated into English by the late Thomas Taylor, and published in London in 1818. The most celebrated work ascribed to him, however, is On the Mysteries of the Egyptians, Chaldeans and Assyrians. It is prefaced by a "Letter of Porphyry to Anebo, the Egyptian Priest," and is itself described as "the Reply of Abammon, the Teacher, to the Letter of Porphyry to Anebo, and Solutions of Questions therein contained." This work was also translated by Mr. Taylor and published in 1821.

The translation was thorough and faithful, but unfortunately, it is difficult for a novice to understand. There is a profusion of unusual terms, and the book abounds with allusions to occurrences, and spectacles in the Initiatory religious Rites which are nowhere explained, leaving the whole meaning more or less vague and uncertain. It has been said in explanation of this that Mr. Taylor desired the sense to be obscure, so that it would be difficult for all general readers to understand it, as truth is only for those who are worthy and capable.

Iamblichus was greatly esteemed by his contemporaries, and those who lived in the ensuing centuries. Eunapios, his biographer, styled him Thaumasios, or the Admirable. Proclus habitually designated him the God-like, and others actually credited him with powers superior to common men. The Emperor Julian considered him as in no way second to Plato, and reverenced him as one of the greatest among mankind.

Iamblichus made a new departure in the teaching of philosophy. He exhibits a comparative indifference to the contemplative discipline, and has introduced procedures which pertained to Magic Rites and the Egyptian Theurgy. It was natural therefore that Porphyry, his friend and former teacher, who taught the other doctrine, should desire to know the nature and extent of this apparent deviation from the accepted philosophic procedures. Uncertain whether his questions would otherwise reach the Master, perhaps then absent from Egypt, he addressed them to Anebo, his disciple, who held the office of prophet or interpreter in the sacerdotal order.

He did not assume to blame or even criticise, but asked as a friend what these theurgic priests believed and were teaching in respect to the several orders of superior and intelligent beings, oracles and divination, the efficacy of sacrifices, and evocations, the reason for employing foreign terms at the Mystic Rites, the Egyptian belief in respect to the First Cause, concluding with enquiries and a discussion in regard to guardian demons, the casting of nativities, and finally asks whether there may not be after all a path to The Good, or true felicity other than by sacrifices and the technique of Theurgy.

The reply of Abammon is explicit and admirable, as affording a key to the whole system. To us, perhaps, who have grown up in another age and received a training in other modes of thinking, his statements and descriptions may appear visionary and even absurd. We may, however, bear in mind that they did not appear so to those for whom he wrote; and should respect the convictions which others reverently and conscientiously entertain.

He proposes to base the classification of Spiritual Essences upon the doctrines of the Assyrians, but modifies it by the views better understood by the Greeks. For example, he enumerates the four genera of gods, demons, heroes or demigods, and souls, and explains some of their distinctions. Before concluding he introduces three other orders from the Assyrian category, making seven in all, occupying distinct grades in the scale of being.

In defining their peculiarities, he begins with "the Good — both the good that is superior to Essence and that which is with Essence," the Monad and Duad of the philosophers; in other words, the Essential Good and that Absolute Good that is prior to it. The gods are supreme, the causes of things, and are circumscribed by no specific distinction. The archangels not carefully described. This may be because they belong to the Assyrian and not to the Egyptian category. They are there enumerated as seven, like the Amshashpands in the Zoroastrian system.

Another race that Abammon names is that of the archons or rulers. These are described as of two species: the cosmocrators or rulers of the planets, and those that rule over the material world. Souls are at the lower step of this seven-graded scale, and make the communication complete from the Absolute One to the inhabitants of the world. The result of this communication is to sustain the lower psychic nature and exalt it to union with Divinity.

This union is not effected by the superior knowledge alone, nor by the action of the higher intellect, although these are necessary auxiliaries. Nothing which pertains to us as human beings is thus efficacious. There must be a more potent energy. This is explained subsequently.

Abammon exalts Theurgy above philosophic contemplation. He explains himself in the following way. The Soul, before she yielded herself to the body, was a hearer of the divine harmony. Accordingly, after she came into the body and heard such of the Choric Songs as retain the divine traces of harmony, she gave them a hearty welcome and by means of them called back to her memory the divine harmony itself.

Divinity, it is insisted, is not brought down into the signs and symbols which, are employed in the art of divination. It is not possible for essence to be developed from any thing which does not contain it already. The susceptible condition is only sensible of what is going on and is now in existence, but foreknowledge reaches even things which have not yet been brought into existence.

Abammon's explanation of the utility of sacrifices is ingenious. Some of the gods, he explains, belong to the sphere of the material world, and others are superior to it. If, then, a person shall desire to worship according to theurgic rites those divinities that belong to the realm of material things, he must employ a mode of worship which is of that sphere. But to the divinities who are above the realm of matter, the offering of any material substance in Holy Rites, is utterly repugnant.

In regard to the efficacy of prayer, Abammon is by no means equivocal or indefinite. He declares that it joins the Sacred Art in an indissoluble union with the divine beings. It leads the worshipper to direct contact and a genuine knowing of the divine nature. A bond of harmonious fellowship is created, and as a result there come gifts from the gods to us before a word is uttered, and our efforts are perfected before they are distinctly cognized. In the most perfect form of prayer the arcane union with the gods is reached, every certainty is assured, enabling our souls to repose perfectly therein. It attracts our habits of thought upward, and imparts to us power from the gods. In short it makes those who make use of it the intimate companions of the divine beings.

Abammon denies the possibility of obtaining perfect foreknowledge by means of an emotional condition. This is a blending of the higher nature with corporeal and material quality, which results in dense ignorance. Hence it is not proper to accept an artificial method in divining, nor to hold any one making use of it in any great esteem. The Theurgist commands the powers of the universe, not as one using the facilities of a human soul, but as a person pre-existent in the order of the divine beings, and one with them.

The First Cause, the God Unknowable, is indicated in graphic language, "Before the things that really are and universal principles is one Divine Essence, prior even to the First God and King abiding immovable in his own absolute Oneness. For nothing thinkable is commingled with him, nor anything whatever; but he is established the antecedent of the God self-fathered, self-produced, sole Father, the Truly Good. For he is the Being greatest and first, the Origin of all things, and the foundation of the primal ideal forms which are produced by the Higher Intellect.

From this One, the Absolute God radiated forth; hence he is the self-fathered and self-sufficient. For this is the First Cause and God of Gods, the Unity from out of the One, prior to Essence and the First Cause of Essence. For from him are both the quality of essence and essence itself — for which reason he is called the Chief Intelligence. These are therefore the oldest principles of all things."

This is perhaps as plain and explicit as this subject can be made. The close resemblance to the Brahman of the Indian system, from whom proceeds Brahma the Creator, is apparent at a glance. Abammon cites also the Tablet of Hermes, which placed Emepht at the head of the celestial divinities, and named a First Intelligence as before him and to be worshipped in silence. The Chaldeans and also the Magi taught a somewhat similar doctrine.

It being established that the Supreme Mind and the Logos or Reason subsist by themselves, it is manifest that all things existing, are from them — beginning with the One and proceeding to the many. There is a Trine: a pure Intelligence above and superior to the universe, an indivisible One in the universe, and another, the universal Life, that is divided and apportioned to all the spheres.

Abammon has taken a view of Fate which though in many respects acceptable seems also to relate to the ruling of the nativity. It is not true, he insists, that every thing is bound with the indissoluble bonds of Necessity. The lowest natures only, which are combined with the changeable order of the universe, and with the body, are thus subjected.

Man, however, has, so to speak, two souls: one that participates of the First Intelligence and the power of the Creator, and one from the astral worlds. The latter follows the motions of those worlds, but the former is above them, and therefore is not influenced by fate or by allotment.

The final section includes a brief summary of the whole discourse. Abammon insists that there is no path to felicity and permanent blessedness apart from the worship of the Gods as here set forth. Divine inspiration alone imparts to us truly the divine life. Man, endowed with perception, was thus united with Divinity in the beforetime by the initiatic vision of the Gods; but he entered into another kind of soul or disposition which was conformed to the human idea of form, and through it became in bondage to Necessity and Fate.

There can be no release and freedom from these except by the Knowledge of the Gods. For the idea or fundamental principle of blessedness is to apperceive Goodness; as the idea of evil exists with the forgetting of the Good and with being deceived in respect to evil. Let it be understood, then, that this knowledge of Good is the first and supreme path to felicity, affording to souls a mental abundance from the Divine One.

This bestowing of felicity by the sacerdotal and theurgic ministration, is called by some the Gate to the Creator of the Universe, and by others the Place or Abode of the One Supremely Good. It first effects the unifying of the soul; then the restoring of the understanding to the participation and vision of the God, and its release from every thing of a contrary nature; and after these, union to the Gods, the bestowers of all benefits.

When this has been accomplished, then it leads the Soul to the Universal Creator, gives it into his keeping and separates it from every thing material, uniting it with the one Eternal Reason. In short, it becomes completely established in the Godhead, endowed with its energy, wisdom, and Creative power. This is what is meant by the Egyptian priests when they, in the Egyptian Book of the Dead, represent the Lord as becoming identified with Osiris; and, with such modifications as the changing forms of the various faiths have made, it may fairly be said to be the accepted creed of the religious world.

alexander wilder
Professor Alexander Wilder
Alexander Wilder (1823-1908) was an American physician, Neoplatonist scholar and influential member of the Theosophical Society which he joined a month after it was founded by Madame Blavatsky and Colonel Olcott in New York, USA in November 1875. Shortly before Isis Unveiled was published in 1877, Madame Blavatsky submitted the MSS to Professor Wilder. She wrote:

"Next to Colonel Olcott, it is Professor Wilder who did the most for me. It is he who made the excellent Index, who corrected the Greek, Latin, and Hebrew words, suggested quotations and wrote the greater part of the Introduction 'Before the Veil.' If this was not acknowledged in the work, the fault is not mine, but because it was Dr. Wilder's express wish that his name should not appear except in footnotes."

This is a commendable decision on Professor Wilder's part that says a great deal about a man who has not received the recognition he deserves. Moreover, many of the statements in Isis Unveiled about Neoplatonism were taken from his small booklet: New Platonism and Alchemy, published in 1869. Hence, although we said in our introduction that we do not necessarily agree with all his conclusions about the correspondence between Porphyry and Abammon, we have the greatest regard for his scholarship, sincerity and honesty.

Alexander Wilder was born in Verona, Oneida County, New York, in the United States in 1823. One of ten children, he was educated at the local school where he memorized every word of the available textbooks, later recalling: "I was passionately desirous to know. I was disposed to ferret out the reason of things. I could not believe a thing right or wrong because anybody said it was..."

In 1840, at the young age of 17, Alexander Wilder discovered Mesmerism which opened his eyes to the existence of a spiritual region of which he was hitherto completely unaware. Writing about this time in his life he said: "it may be heaven or hell, but that depends upon our own state of mind. There are no rewards or punishments, except as they are incident with ourselves."

"In the field of mind, spirituality and the higher knowing, I made haste very slowly. I sought information from everyone and conscientiously examined it, unwilling to accept anything blindly. I exercised the reasoning faculty, but sought to be open to the superior sense."

From 1844 to 1851, he drifted from one place and job to another. His religious experiences consisted in divesting himself from the various wrong beliefs and dogmatic opinions he had imbibed from his strict, puritanical parents and Baptist upbringing. Prompted by a lady who had been one of his teachers in boyhood, he procured and read with interest the philosophical and theological works of Emanuel Swedenborg.

For some years Wilder supported himself by teaching, farming, and typesetting. Having taught himself Greek, Latin, and Hebrew, he next took up the study of medicine in order to be independent of doctors but became so interested in the subject that he pursued it intensively under the guidance of a local physician and obtained a degree from the Syracuse Medical College, New York, in 1850.

It is interesting in this connection that in 1875 he published a pamphlet entitled Vaccination: a Medical Fallacy, in which he declared, "Vaccination is physically and morally wrong, and its advocates are interiorly conscious of it, or else they would trust to argument and conviction." How little has changed in nearly 150 years! Dr Wilder was editor of several highly regarded medical publications in his day, and published The History of Medicine in 1901 to critical acclaim.

As we said earlier, Professor Wilder was one of the earliest members of the Theosophical Society. During the years 1877-1880 he served as a Vice President of the society and was a member of the General Council until his death in Newark, New Jersey in 1908.