Image of God
Afterword by Occult Mysteries
Nature has been called many things by scientists, poets and philosophers throughout the ages, but what is it? You may think the answer is obvious; a bit like asking someone what the 'environment' is or what 'weather' is. You may even think we're a bit dim to even ask such a silly question. But if we dig a little we find that neither science nor scholarship can tell us what 'Nature' actually is, even though the word is blithely bandied about as if the meaning were crystal clear to all.

As is our wont, we dip first into that muddy pool of misinformation which is Wikipedia. This tells us that "Nature, in the broadest sense, is the natural, physical, material world or universe." At first glance, there is not much wrong with this definition. But if we continue our excavations—as every good occultist should do if he or she wishes to discover the truth about anything—we find several problems with this answer. Firstly, it ignores the spiritual dimension entirely. It then compounds this error by adding: "Nature can refer to the phenomena of the physical world, and also to life in general."

What about the phenomena of the non-physical world? Is this to be excluded because the prevailing view among both scientists and laymen is that anything which cannot be known via our physical senses or instruments does not exist? If this were true—which it is not—the electricity we rely upon to power our technological world would also be non-existent for it cannot be seen, heard, tasted, smelled or touched directly, yet it is manifestly a material force of Nature as we pointed out in our article on the Occult Sun.

Electricity can only be observed when it interacts with the physical world, such as a bolt of lightning striking a tree, or receiving a nasty jolt should you be foolish or careless enough to touch a 'live' wire. This shows us that Nature encompasses a much greater sphere of activity than science currently recognises.

Secondly, if by 'life' the editors of Wikipedia mean what passes for existence among those who believe that living means grabbing as much wealth, pleasure and material success as possible with the minimum amount of effort, we cannot see anything remotely 'natural' in this. Quite the opposite. Life in this sense is profoundly unnatural from any kind of rational, spiritual perspective.

Let us see if the Oxford English Dictionary (OED) does any better. This tells us that Nature is "the phenomena of the physical world collectively, including plants, animals, the landscape, and other features and products of the earth, as opposed to humans or human creations," adding, in italics, "the breathtaking beauty of nature." Well—that is an improvement on Wikipedia!

The 17th century French philosopher, Blaise Pascal, went further when he described Nature in the following terms: "Nature has perfections to show that she is the image of God, and defects, to show that she is only His image." This is the only definition an occultist can agree with as all the others we have mentioned exclude God from the picture.

The English poet William Cowper, perhaps influenced by Pascal, said: "Nature is a good name for an effect whose cause is God." Dante called Nature "the art of God," while Charlotte Brontë, in her novel Jane Eyre, wrote: "We know that God is everywhere; but certainly we feel His presence most when His works are on the grandest scale spread before us; and it is in the unclouded night-sky, where His worlds wheel their silent course, that we read clearest His infinitude, His omnipotence, His omnipresence."

The creator of the fictional consulting detective Sherlock Holmes, and indefatigable investigator of the hidden side of life, Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, knew well that Nature is the image and cloak of Divinity. "Nature, "he wrote "is the true revelation of the Deity to man. The nearest green field is the inspired page from which you may read all that it is needful for you to know." Nature blesses us with many things; with the sun, the valleys and the seas; with the stars and with the holy rainbow arch; God's glowing covenant and illumined promise of a Bridge to Paradise for the worthy who are on the way Home.

Henry Duncan, in his little-known essays on the Sacred Philosophy of the Seasons, writes: "An acquaintance, remarkable for his shrewdness when beholding Nature, pulled a primrose from a hedgerow, and after expressing his admiration of its simple beauties, took up a clod of soil in his other hand, and emphatically exclaimed: 'What but Almighty Power could extract that from this?' Everything in the operations of the Creator is worthy of devout admiration; but I scarcely know anything in the world which brings together and concentrates so many wonders of designing wisdom and benevolence as the structure and qualities of a flower—and assuredly not a little is added to the surprise and pious feeling with which this delightful production is contemplated, when we think of the, seemingly, crude materials from which it is elaborated.

"The beauty of form and colour, the sweetness of the fragrance; the delicate and skilful nature of the organisation; the careful provisions, the forethought, the contrivance, the suiting of parts, as regards the propagation of the species, the adaptations of the subsistence and enjoyment of the insect tribes—all produced by the wonderful union of a few simple and apparently unfit substances, cannot fail to excite in the reflecting mind the most lovely sentiments of astonishment, and to force upon it the conviction, that there, without doubt, is the finger of God." Here speaks the voice of true inspiration.

We would like to end this afterword with a final quotation from an unremarkable young girl no one would ever have heard of were it not for the harrowing events which cut short her life at the tender age of fifteen.

"The best remedy for those who are frightened, lonely or unhappy is to go outside, somewhere they can be alone, alone with the sky, nature and God. For then and only then can you feel that everything is as it should be and that God wants people to be happy amid nature's beauty and simplicity. As long as this exists, and that should be forever, I know that there will be solace for every sorrow, whatever the circumstances. I firmly believe that nature can bring comfort to all who suffer."

Such are the words Anne Frank wrote in her now famous diary on Wednesday, 23 February 1944. Six months later she was arrested by the Nazis and interned in Bergen-Belsen concentration camp. She died of typhus less than three months before the camp was liberated in April 1945.