Kadeir Taliesin
Afterword by Occult Mysteries. We analyse a metaphysical prose poem by the Welsh Bard Taliesin
We regard Taliesin as one of the last of the truly great Druid Hierophants who once ruled the British Isles in strict justice and Divine Wisdom. We investigated the origins, rites, beliefs and teachings of the Druids in October 2017 as well as in an article about Stonehenge published earlier the same year.

Details of Taliesin's life are sparse. Apart from a brief mention in the History of the Britons published in Latin some two hundred years after his death almost nothing is known about him. He is thought to have flourished during the reign of the British chieftain, Outigirn or Eudeyrn in the 6th century A.D., but we have good reason to think he lived much earlier as we shall show later on.

Kadeir Taliesin, or the Chair of Taliesin—the prose poem we have chosen to analyse is taken from the Book of Taliesin (Llyfr Taliesin). This is an incomplete manuscript dating from ca. 1300 containing about 60 compositions originally attributed to Taliesin, but now thought to be the work of several different writers. Scholars are at liberty to think what they wish; we are rather more concerned with what is written—not who wrote it!

After its discovery, the MSS passed through the hands of several collectors until it was inherited by William Watkin Edward Wynne in 1859 who subsequently donated it to the National Library of Wales. There have been several translations. W. F. Skene's The Four Ancient Books of Wales, published in 1868; a three volume edition edited by John Gwenogvryn Evans, published in 1915; and latterly a new translation by Penguin Classics published in 2019 entitled The Book of Taliesin. Poems of Warfare and Praise in an Enchanted Britain.

In our view, none of these editions convey the hidden meaning of Taliesin's poetry. However, the translators are not to be blamed for this omission, since none of them possess any knowledge of the Mysteries, much less the occult sciences. For this reason we have chosen Edward Davies' translation of the Kadeir Taliesin included in his monumental survey of Druidism, The Mythology and Rites of the British Druids published in 1809.

Davies is now sadly out of favour among Celtic scholars who regard his work as 'wildly inaccurate' and 'speculative.' Among the criticisms hurled at him from the lectern of literary orthodoxy are that he was not fluent in Welsh and used 'unreliable and unverifiable sources.' Much the same has been said of Madame Blavatsky, and for the same reasons. This alone commends his scholarship to us; a persuasion reinforced by his inspired rendition of the prose poem which forms the subject of this afterword.

The only changes we have made to Davies' translation is the arrangement of the whole in six verses to aid the reader's comprehension. The poem is followed by our analysis of a few of the occult truths it contains and an explanation of the more obscure terms used by Taliesin. It can be found between pages 270 and 281 in Davies' book.

asterisks
The Kadeir Taliesin
(The Chair of Taliesin)
I am he who animates the fire
To the honour of the god Dovydd.
In behalf of the assembly of associates,
Qualified to treat of the mysteries
A Bard, with the knowledge of a Sywedydd
When he deliberately recites
The inspired song of the Western Cûdd
On a serene night amongst the stones.

As to loquacious, glittering Bards
Their encomium attracts me not.
When moving in the course:
Admiration is their great object.
And I am a silent proficient,
Who addresses the Bards of the land:
It is mine to animate the hero;
To persuade the unadvised;
To awaken the silent beholder——
The bold illuminator of kings!
I am no shallow artist
Greeting the Bards of a household
Like a subtle parasite.
The Ocean has a due Profundity!

The man of complete discipline
Has obtained the mead of honour
In every nightly celebration
When Dïen is propitiated
With an offering of wheat,
And the suavity of bees,
And incense and myrrh,
And aloes, from beyond the seas,
And the gold pipes of Lleu,
And cheerful, precious silver,
And the ruddy gem,
And the berries, and the foam of the ocean,
And cresses of purifying quality,
Laved in the fountain,
And a joint contribution of wort,
The founder of liquor,
Supplied by the assembly,
And a raised load
Secluded from the moon,
Of placid, cheerful vervain.

With priests of intelligence,
To officiate in behalf of the Moon,
And the concourse of associated men,
Under the open breeze of the sky.
With the maceration and sprinkling.
And the boat of glass
In the hand of the stranger.
And the stout youth with pitch,
And the honoured Segryffyg,
And medical plants,
From an exorcised spot.

And Bards with flowers,
And perfect convolutions,
And primroses, and leaves of the Briw,
With the points of the tree of purposes
And solution of doubts,
And frequent mutual pledges;
And with wine which flows to the brim,
from Rome to Rosedd.
And deep standing water,
A flood which has the gift of Dovydd,
Or the tree of pure gold
Which becomes of a fructifying quality
When that Brewer gives it a boiling
Who presided over the cauldron of the five plants.

Hence the stream of Gwion
And the reign of serenity,
And honey and trefoil,
And horns, flowing with mead
Meet for a sovereign is the lore of the Druids!

asterisks
Analysis
Before we explain the various terms used by Taliesin it is important to emphasise the allegorical and symbolical nature of the poem. There is hardly a word to be read literally within it. The title tells us this is an address from 'the chair'—a term still used today in public and business meetings. The chair from which Taliesin addresses the assembled bards served the same purpose and was held in the same reverent regard as the papal chair of the Catholic Church.

From the beginning Taliesin stresses the importance of his own pontifical character, as distinguished from mere poets, or even from the Bard of the Household, who was an officer of no mean rank at the British Court. Such Bards were privileged to be entertained at the king's table, were endowed with free land, had their wardrobe furnished at the king's expense, and had many other privileges. Yet, they were far below the rank of the great Cathedral Bard, or Hierophant of the ancient Druidical Order, such as Taliesin himself.

Fire, as Blavatsky tells us in The Secret Doctrine "is the beginning and end of every material and spiritual thing." If you wish to know exactly what kind of 'fire' it is that Taliesin 'animates,' then we refer you to our article on the Mystery of the Druids for the answer. A Sywedydd was a Druid mystagogue, or revealer of the Mysteries. Cûdd means 'the dark repository' or Sacred Ark. In other words the Mysteries themselves.

Dïen was the Welsh counterpart to Ceres and the other ancient goddesses associated with wheat, itself a symbol of heavenly or Divine Wisdom. The phrase 'suavity of bees' has puzzled many translators, but all it means is the product of bees—honey! This, as well as the plant Gwlydd were used in the festivals of the Druids, and the word for honey, gwlid, or Gwlydd, is the same as the name of that plant, which is the Samolus, or brookweed, of the order of primroses, mentioned later in the poem.

The ruddy gem was the ruby, or if that was not available, the garnet; and the ruby is a royal gem as William Fernie tells us in The Occult and the Curative Powers of Precious Stones reviewed among our occult books. This was commonly worn on the right hand of the Arch Druid. The Samolus, by the way, was gathered in a ritualistic manner with the left hand only.

The 'gold pipes of Lleu' refers to some plant with a yellow flower and hollow stem. No one knows what this was for certain, but likely candidates are Fluxwort, or Fluxweed. This was highly extolled by Paracelsus on account of its excellent healing properties. The Druids called it Ariant Gwion, or Gwion's silver, which points to the silver mentioned in the same verse, thus concealing the identity of the plant under the symbols of both gold and silver.

Gwion was the superintendent of the mystical cauldron which played a central part in all Druid rites. Interestingly, Fluxweed, or descurainia sophia to give it its botanical name, is a primary ingredient in the 'polyjuice potion' made famous in the Harry Potter books! The ruddy gem also alluded to another plant, called Eirin Gwion, which is the wild Nep, or white vine—bryonia alba—also known as the English mandrake and wild hops. The Cresses mentioned were used for cleansing and purifying purposes.

Vervain, mentioned at the end of the third verse, was highly esteemed by the Druids. Among its quaint names were 'The Fiend's Aversion' and 'The Inchanter's plants.' Both refer back to the Druids who were greatly feared and loathed in equal measure by their enemies. Vervain was used to cast lots and tell the future. Anointing with this plant, was thought to be the best way to obtain all that the heart could desire, and it kept off fevers, procured friendship, and the like.

It had to be gathered at the rise of Sirius, without being looked upon, either by the Sun or the Moon. But first the earth had to be propitiated by a libation of honey. In digging it up, only the left hand had to be used; it was then waved aloft, and the leaves, stalk and roots were to be dried separately in the shade. The couches used at Druid festivals were sprinkled with water infused with Vervain.

Most of the remaining ingredients enumerated in this passage were used in the preparation of the mystical cauldron mentioned earlier. The boat of glass was a curious instrument illustrated in a bass-relief found at Autun, in central France shown at the top of this sidebar. This represents the Hierophant, bearing his sceptre of office as head of the Sacred Order, and crowned with a garland of oak leaves. He is approached by a Druid of inferior rank, who carries in his right hand an object shaped like a crescent moon when six days old. This was the mysterious 'boat of glass' Taliesin refers to; one of several ways in which the Druids recognised a 'stranger' as one of their own. The 'stout youth with pitch' refers to the torches carried in the nocturnal Mysteries.

The Segyrffyg mentioned in the fourth verse was a type of trefoil, which protected from Illusion, or from the enchantment of a witch or wizard. The exorcised spot referred to the practice of the Druids of exorcising the ground with an iron instrument to draw a circle around any plant before digging it up.

Primroses mentioned in the fifth verse ranked very highly amongst the mystical flora. Their Welsh name Brigallu is a compound of the words Bri (dignity) and Gallu (power). The leaves of the Briw are those of Vervain, and the points of the tree of purposes refers to the same plant; symbolical sprigs, with which to cast the lots mentioned earlier.

We said at the beginning of our afterword that we have good reason to think Taliesin lived much earlier than the 6th century. The proof is found in the phrase 'from Rome to Rosedd' in the fifth verse. This dates the poem to an age when the Druids were well acquainted with the Romans, but when Rome itself was still Pagan. You will have noted that there is not a single Christian idea in the whole poem. Instead we see references to the worship of the Moon, to the ancient goddess of corn and to the Sacred Fire.

The 'deep standing water' refers to two things. Firstly to the bath of baptism, in which the candidate for acceptance as a pupil of the Druids was immersed in water, or, in some cases, cast adrift in a coracle on the waters of Cardigan Bay. Secondly to the Vast 'Deep' of the Cosmic Realms. The Gift of Dovydd was the Selago, or hedge hyssop, another valuable plant sacred to the Druids.

The Roman historian Pliny tells at that: "With great care and superstition did the Druids gather the Selago. Nothing of iron was to touch, or cut it, nor was the bare hand thought worthy of that honour, but a peculiar vesture, or sagus, applied by means of the right hand; the vesture must have been holy, and taken off from some sacred person privately, and with the left hand only. The gatherer was to be clothed in white, his feet naked, a Druid, and his feet first having been washed in pure water (probably dew). He was first to offer a sacrifice of bread and wine, before he proceeded to gather the Selago, which was carried from the place of its nativity, in a clean new napkin. This was preserved by the Druids, as a charm against all misfortunes."

The 'Tree of pure gold' was the mistletoe, which the Arch Druid gathered with a golden sickle on the sixth day of the moon. The Druids called Mistletoe 'All Heal' and the 'Tree of the High Summit'—an apt name the significance of which will not be lost on some of our readers.

This most remarkable of poems concludes with mention of the mystical cauldron 'of the five plants.' This may be a concealed reference to the five occult elements as well as the ingredients enumerated earlier in the poem, each of which also had its symbolical meaning. Those who had quaffed their thirst at the sacred Cauldron acquired not only genius, and a flood of inspiration, but also the gift of serenity, that elusive but blessed Peace Within which we have mentioned in so many of our articles. Hence, as Taliesin declares, the lore of the Druids was truly 'meet for sovereign princes' as we hope our brief analysis of his sublime poem has shown you.