Past life recall
Afterword by Occult Mysteries
In Occult Enigmas by J Michaud PhD, from which we have drawn so much of our Occult Studies course, the author recalls some of his own past lives with little enthusiasm. Those lives in which he was sometimes a soldier, at others a warrior, may have ended no less tragically than the life related by Seán Mac Gréine. Dr Michaud writes:

"When you first begin to contact your previous incarnations you may get some very unpleasant surprises. I shall never forget the first person who I recalled in the shape of a horrible and murderous looking Arab, with a great hook-nose, little black, cruel eyes like currants, and a great scimitar in his hand.

"I thought—heaven help me—is that me? I can assure you I expected something quite different, and much more elevating. But there you are. Your sins will surely find you out!

"Another time I discovered myself as a granite-faced Japanese Samurai, twirling around a glittering Japanese sword. I also remember a Hawaiian warrior with a long spear ready poised for throwing and with an expression on his face that meant business!

"No wonder I came back this time with all the fighting instincts well developed. Dreaming as a boy of the great armies I would lead to victory when I grew up...

"Of course, there were different types, too, on other occasions. I did not always see myself as a cruel and determined soldier and fighter. There is one for instance where I appear as a particularly vicious and mean-looking miser!

"And there have been many others of which I am also aware...

"But I must not bore you with my experiences. I only tell about them in order to give you a hint or two as to what you might expect!"

Some readers may think Dr Michaud's recollections are enough to discourage anyone from ever attempting to recall their past lives! The writer has a great deal of sympathy with this view having his own memories of past lives that ended no less tragically than that of the royal bodyguard from Nineveh who was forced to choose between imprisonment and death.

In our article on the lost doctrine of Reincarnation we refer to the researches of Dr Ian Stevenson. He conducted more than 2,500 studies of young children who claimed to remember past lives and found that most of them met a violent death in their previous life. This confirms what Seán Mac Gréine experienced and what Occult Science has always known; the incidents which stand out in the memory and are most readily recalled are those which made the strongest emotional impression upon us.

So why so few of us recall our past lives? The Jews have a myth that may provide the answer as well as the origin of the mysterious indentation we have on our upper lip—the philtrum as it is known. The myth tells us that Lailah, the angel of conception according to Jewish belief, brings the soul and the seed together and arranges for the seed to be planted in the womb. As the unborn infant grows, Lailah places a lighted candle at its head, so that it can see from one end of the world to the other.

Many religious traditions assert that the disembodied soul (Higher Self in our terminology) remembers its past lives. Hence 'seeing from one end of the world to the other' may well be a concealed reference to reincarnation. The myth goes on to tell us that when the child is born, the angel Lailah snuffs out the candle and strikes the child's lip forcibly with its index finger. Whereupon it forgets everything the soul knows, unless its memories are awakened, either by death, or artificially by hypnotic regression, meditation or other spiritual exercises.

Incidentally the term 'philtrum' comes to us from the Ancient Greek philtron, meaning a 'love charm', which is where we get our word philtre from. This is interesting for, as we may read in chapter 17 of The Quest of Ruru, "Love and Memory are the same; for that which we do not love we soon forget as a rule, and the more we love the longer we remember—while perfect love can never be forgotten." This was certainly true of the unfortunate lovers parted by the tragic circumstances Seán Mac Gréine describes in his moving story.

As well as the Jewish myth, we have the Orphic belief that the newly dead who drink from the River Lethe lose all memory of their past existence. This is reprised in Book X of Plato's Republic in which the souls of the dead must drink from the "river of Unmindfulness" before they are reborn on earth. "...and there they camped at eventide by the River of Forgetfulness, whose waters no vessel can contain. They were all required to drink a measure of the water, and those who were not saved by their good sense drank more than the measure, and each one as he drank forgot all things."

If we take 'good sense' as a synonym for wisdom, Plato's meaning is clear; only the wise retain memories of their past lives, though it does not necessarily follow that even they will always be able to recall them. In Virgil's Aeneid, Aeneas sees a sequestered grove and rustling forest thickets, and the river Lethe drifting past those peaceful homes, about which hovered countless peoples and tribes. Aeneas is startled and asks his father Anchises who all these thronging hordes might be. "Spirits, replies his guide, "to whom second bodies are owed by Fate, and at the water of Lethe's stream they drink the soothing draught of long forgetfulness, so that you see, with memory washed away, they may revisit the earth once more."

So perhaps it is just as well so few of us can recall much if anything of our past lives, especially if they contain incidents as disturbing and unsettling as those related by Seán Mac Gréine. But we do not want to give the impression that it is only the disappointments, losses and tragedies of the past which are most often recalled. Life on earth is never all black or all white. It is a mixture of light and dark, happiness and sorrow, successes and failures, highs and lows. We find confirmation of this in the chapter on Reincarnation in Occult Enigmas we quoted from earlier. Dr Michaud continues:

"The author has very vivid memories of one of his previous incarnations in Egypt when he and some others were close friends. Our memories of these times are very vivid indeed and it goes to show that even as we reincarnate individually, so we also meet our friends again, and also our enemies; for the two greatest magnets are Love and Hatred. I think that great Love and great hatred must inevitably come together again in successive incarnations, until all hatred is turned into Love and all Love has been perfected in unselfishness and Beauty."

At the end of Seán Mac Gréine's story, Nabu, the 'Holder of the Hand' asks, "Then we will see each other again in the future, in some way, in better circumstance and on an equal footing?" His hope is echoed earlier in the story when the High Priest says "You may look to the future with hope that in lives yet to come you may meet one another again, whether on earth, or in the heavens I do not know, and so find the bounty of happiness and Truth that eludes you today."

There is great comfort as well as truth in these words, for as we may also read in The Quest of Ruru: "Not until both the lovers have learnt to sacrifice ALL—even their love—if necessary...only then can they become free of the great Wheels and Cycles of rebirth on earth. As long as they are a prey to jealousy, greed, selfishness, attachment to worthless worldly goods and slaves to the senses, they must return to Earth with which they then are still attuned; until the final lesson has been mastered."

We find the selfsame truth proclaimed in another of Dr Michaud's books—Symphonie Fantastique—when the principal protagonist, Iambus, is destroyed by the gods for his wickedness. "And the terrible cry of Iambus found an echo in the highest Realms of Heaven, where dwelt the sweet, adorable counterpart of him, now condemned to be alone without her Mate for Aeons of Eternities through the wilfulness of her other half, who, though now shattered in the Deeps of Time, was still bound to her by the unbreakable bonds of true affinity. And only in that lay his chance of resurrection; for man and woman, both alike, are threefold, like their Maker: Body, Mind and Soul—ever the same in every Realm of Being. And each of these three parts but half complete in themselves. Though worlds away in Time and Space, in thought and action and every other circumstance of life eternal: they must rejoin some time . . . to be completed and perfected in the end and blended into one great God."

We end this afterword with the earnest prayer that sometime, somewhere in God's vast universe, the Holder of the Hand will once more meet the Princess of his heart, mind and soul, to be reunited and blend in perfect bliss, never more to be parted in this or any other world.