Author's afterword
I have been working on a version of this poem for over twenty years but it only recently came to completion thanks to the chance discovery of this wonderful website some six years ago. I have always been interested in esoteric themes and philosophies and here in one place, I unearthed a treasure trove of knowledge and parable which made my own previous decades of study feel very incomplete indeed. Thanks to the many excellent resources provided by the editors I have been able to answer certain questions which arose during the composition of this poem.

I chose the title Phoenix Rising because it represents the death of the material self in the fire of material experience releasing the spirit to a greater state of understanding. Birds have always symbolised the spirit. In the Christian Church the Holy Spirit is represented as a dove—but in many cultures, birds are symbols for the human spirit. In The Conference of the Birds, a twelfth century poem by Sufi poet Attar of Nishapur, the birds are symbols for different human failings but they seek a spirit in China—the East—who will help them master themselves. For it is to the East that we must look for Wisdom and the appearance of the Morning star which heralds the coming of the greater light of the Sun. A greater light that matches the light within us which burns with rainbows prismed fire—an apt symbol of the occult doctrine of the sevenfold constitution of man.

My poem speaks to and for all those who yearn to be awakened by the call of the One Light of Truth; who recognise that the seeker must undergo many tests and trials before the dross of the lower self is transmuted into the pure gold of the harvest of experience, just as the phoenix arises reborn from the ashes of its former self, so it may return to the Land of the Living.

The imagery of the Sun and Moon alludes to the cycles of time and reincarnation: a distant sun ago—the original fall into matter from the realms of Light that all of us who long for liberation, dimly remember. A heavenly call—a Divine Song—that calls us forth time and time again to become wiser; to improve ourselves through the cycles of existence so that we may once again re-join the Great Light from which we first emerged, enriched with the wisdom of hard-won experience. No need then of the metronome of the moon—meaning our many cycles of reincarnation. The moon at this point in the poem is also an analogy for the deceptive nature of its light, a borrowed garment from the sun—the cloak I had worn at the feast; the feast being a carnal celebration of the material life. Things are not what they seem under the deceptive light of the moon and take on a different quality from that of the day.

This is running away from the day and falling into matter. . .he ran through the fields to the noise from a feast and far from the words of St. Paul told by priest. The questioning and often rejection of the religion of one's youth has been the catalyst that has launched many a seeker on their personal search for truth, as we can read in Kurt Flaxman's article 'From war to Peace', in which he writes "the Catholic Church has produced more atheists than science ever has or will." I doubt if my readers will disagree with him.

If there is one thing which drives people away from organised religion more often than any other, it is probably hypocrisy. "As told by priest" reinforces this idea, for no one who has diligently studied the words of St Paul can be in any doubt that the Church has distorted them and done everything in its power to excise the gnostic tenets he espoused. St Paul—as a self-confessed initiate of the Mysteries—had much to say about the Ancient Wisdom, already hoary with age in his times, but those who came after him—the priest in my poem—have twisted his words.

The desire to dance is an image connoting the rhythms of life—the Islamic Sufis have perfected this in the dances of their Whirling Dervishes which are designed to raise the spirit into a state of communion with the higher realms. As the participant dances, their robes flare out, creating a moving circle when seen from above, their red fez acting as the eye within the circle—an ancient symbol for The One and also emblematical of the occult evolutionary cycles of time.

The dancing dead on the other hand whose souls have alchemically been altered to lead—are those who use their incarnation to solidify their material nature as opposed to winnowing their spirit in the flames of experience. They dance to the Moon and not the Sun. The Gnostics called them hylics, those who are unconscious to the glories of a greater existence and only preoccupied with material things, sensuality and power over others. Then, like the character in the poem, come the psychikoi, those who can be awakened with the right encouragement by the pneumatikoi—the inspired, such as the Dawn Friend towards the end of the poem. She is a herald of the Sun, a friend of the morning and an embodiment both of the Morning Star itself and also the Higher self. As such she symbolises the Great Awakener who leads us out of the dark carnival of earthly life into Life Eternal and Abiding Truth. The first step in this process is the realisation that our material existence is not what it seems.

This is only half the picture, for my poem is also the story of the Prodigal Son told in reverse. We see him at the carnival of life with all its temptations and alluring pleasures which possess an almost irresistible attraction for us all. Lost in such a labyrinth of fairground distractions it is all too easy to forget why we came to earth. Hence, those who would be wise must keep alert and question Where are you sun?. . .what happened to the day, it can't be dead. For the light of truth can never die. The prodigal son remembers his home in the midst of the confusion and he turns back to meet his father half way—the Dawn Friend, the godspell that comes to greet him towards the end. As he recalls this and his previous struggles he says poor heavy head. A reminder that intellect is an unreliable guide to the things of the spirit which hears not the call from on High.

The poem reaches its climax with the arrival of the Sun foreshadowed earlier by the appearance of its emissary—the bright and morning star; the diamond now twinkling in dawn's opal choir—the original Dawn Friend and godspell who opens up a different vista of existence and comprehension. Here all makes sense and colours and scents and sounds blend into one another in a synæsthetic vision—a holy splendour of great loveliness for it is love that has admitted him to these realms away from the Witch of the West and death.

I always think it is strange to say falling in love. This love one falls into is more often than not the product of the various glands of the body working overtime and dumping their chemicals into the body in a sensual overload which overwhelms and causes one to fall deeper into matter as one's body becomes the puppet of very material forces. Should not our aim rather be, (if we really want to return to where it is safe and beautiful and peaceful), to Rise in Love? For it is through rising that we discover we possess wings. Wings we can expand—much like a butterfly does when first emerging from its cocoon, literally breathing the wings into being—unfurling them with each breath until they are sturdy enough to carry it to new horizons. In the end the Phoenix rises because it dares to LOVE.