Quest for Wisdom

In the afterword to this article, we discuss our work of creating and maintaining this website, which too is a Quest for Wisdom that mirrors the work of Erika Hahn in her analysis of the Story of Ishtar
We publish this article on the day we celebrate the fourth anniversary of occult-mysteries. In those four years, our website has grown from just 12 pages to over 200, embracing in its development four complete occult books, a self-contained study course, and a range of articles on every conceivable topic, many of which include the most advanced occult scientific teachings, never before made available to the public.

Our work is by no means complete. There are several subjects we have yet to explore, some that readers have asked us to develop and expand, and others which were on the drawing board from the very beginning, but for various reasons, have yet to be tackled. This future work includes further articles on the material sciences, esoteric philosophy, magic, astrology, inspired literature and poetry, and an investigation of the most important sacred text of the past — the so-called Corpus Hermeticum. The plan we formulated four years ago is slowly coming to fruition, though it will take several more years before it is completed..

Part of that plan is to reach out to those who long for meaning and purpose in their lives. Men and women from all walks of life, of all races and creeds, who, but for the want of nourishing food, starve by the wayside of life, finding only the noise and clutter of unwisdom and idle speculation. Noise disgorged by the many pretenders to truth who promise much, but deliver nothing in the way of health-giving sustenance. Our Astral Conversations series, begun in December 2015 and concluded in January 2017, is intended for just such seekers.

Another aspect of our work is to attempt to bridge the ever-widening chasm between science and religion. We are greatly indebted to John Temple and his superb series of twelve articles on the search for Truth in the furtherance of this aim, which was completed in early 2019.

By far the hardest task we set ourselves when we began our work was to counter the misinformation about the occult which is rife in the world today. The same misinformation is to be found within science and religion too, adding to the misconceptions which reign within the minds of those seeking Truth. Many who try to provide answers mean well, but lacking the occult knowledge and training to be of real service to their listeners, often lead them into greater confusion and disillusionment.

As we review the progress we have made we are acutely aware of how much more still needs to be done. We take no credit for the little we have achieved, for that belongs fairly and squarely to the many great occult teachers and writers whose work we have drawn upon to create our content. Preeminent among them are H. P. Blavatsky and J Michaud PhD, to whom, as we say on our About page, the world owes a debt so great that it can never be repaid—except with deepest respect and gratitude for the wonderful service they have rendered to mankind in reviving and restoring the Wisdom of the Ages.

This is the nearest we have ever come to writing a blog. Nor do we intend to do so in the future, for what we have to say can be found in our articles and books. Not that we have anything against blogs or bloggers, some of whom are doing their readers a great service in providing spiritual nourishment unobtainable in the mainstream media. One of these is path-of-regeneration, which tells us that it offers: "some comfort and nourishment to those set upon the steep and narrow way—and to all lovers of Truth and Beauty alike."

It is therefore timely that on the day we celebrate four years online, we publish the story of Ishtar, which describes the Quest for Wisdom we are all engaged upon, whether we realise it or not. Tammuz symbolises the Higher Self in all of us, imprisoned in the 'underworld' of our material passions and desires which prevent us from beholding Ishtar, the bright and shining goddess of Wisdom. Ishtar also symbolises the journey of the Higher Self from Light to darkness, and back again to the Light, enriched with the wisdom of experience gained through its incarnations on earth.

We have never asked our readers for donations, and do not do so now. If you have benefited from our work the greatest service you can render us—and your fellow seekers after Truth—is to mention this website to those whom you feel might benefit from it. We leave the means up to you. But be quite sure that the good seeds you scatter in this way will come to fruition in the minds of your hearers, even if it is not for many lifetimes to come. And they will have YOU to thank for setting their feet upon the path to the Light.