Stoicism
Afterword by the author
No one can deny the fact that it would take many long years of study and determination to accumulate the knowledge and experience necessary to become proficient in any of the modern material sciences. This is, even more, the case when we apply the same principle to Occult Science and we should be under no illusion just how daunting the task becomes even to scratch the surface of its sublime teachings. But above all, it is a Practical Science and one which we can use to our benefit as a means to promote self-awareness and self-improvement.

Another system of practical philosophy which I have explored and found to be immensely beneficial in my day to day life is Stoic Philosophy. The roots of this philosophy stretch back more than 2000 years to the partially enlightened days of the Greek civilisation, and it continued to grow and develop well into Roman times. Some of its most notable exponents include names such as Epictetus, Seneca and Marcus Aurelius. These great men spent their lives seeking to understand the finer shades of the human condition. Their advice is as relevant and helpful now as it was back then.

This is of course because the worst aspects of our lower natures will always need purifying if we are to stand any hope of freeing ourselves from the continuing need to reincarnate on Earth, what Eastern mystics call the 'wheel of Destiny' or fate. Today this task is more difficult than it has ever been due to the manifold complexities and unrelenting pace of material science which has long since abandoned its spiritual counterpart. The result is clear for all open-minded and spiritually awake individuals to see for themselves, and unfortunately, it is not a pretty sight.

I thought it might be beneficial to briefly examine the four main Stoic Virtues as one of the primary aspects of this philosophy involves improving an individual's ethical and moral well-being. This can be achieved through the gradual process of developing fortitude and self-control as a means to overcoming destructive emotions. The first virtue is Courage. Epictetus tells us: "The greater the difficulty, the more glory in surmounting it. Skilful pilots gain their reputation from storms and tempests."

The second virtue is Justice. "Commitment to justice in your own acts. Which means: thought and action resulting in the common good. What you were born to do," says Marcus Aurelius. The third Stoic virtue is Temperance which Marcus Aurelius describes as: "If you seek tranquillity, do less.' Or (more accurately) do what's essential—what the logos of a social being requires, and in the requisite way. Which brings a double satisfaction: to do less, better. Because most of what we say and do is not essential. If you can eliminate it, you'll have more time, and more tranquillity. Ask yourself at every moment, 'Is this necessary?"

The last Stoic virtue is Wisdom. Epictetus tells us anent this: "The chief task in life is simply this: to identify and separate matters so that I can say clearly to myself which are externals not under my control, and which have to do with the choices I actually control. Where then do I look for good and evil? Not to uncontrollable externals, but within myself to the choices that are my own."

This is good advice as I'm sure most of you will agree, though few follow it! Another piece of good advice from Epictetus is his thoughts on Choice. "If thou wouldst advance, be content to let people think thee senseless and foolish as regards external things. Wish not ever to seem wise, and if ever thou shalt find thyself accounted to be somebody, then mistrust thyself. For know that it is not easy to make a choice that shall agree both with outward things and with Nature, but it must needs be that he who is careful of the one shall neglect the other."

One of the central tenants of Stoicism is the recognition of the fact that we cannot control the world around us. Still, we can determine how we respond to the trials and tribulations of life, and this response should always be guided by the above virtues. No matter what happens, we always have the capacity to use reason and make choices. We should always try to do the right thing. To let virtue guide us. It's all that we can control. Let the rest take care of itself, as it will with or without your consent. I am pleased to tell you that Stoic Philosophy has undergone somewhat of a revival in modern times so if you would like to explore more of what it has to offer, please see the Further reading links below.