Sublime Poetry
Afterword by Occult Mysteries
The inspired Poet is blessed with a peculiar constitution and innate sensitivity which allows him, often quite unconsciously, to pierce the veil that shrouds the Mysteries of God from the eyes and ears of those not qualified to see and hear these great Blessings. This is sublime Poetry and there is no mistaking it when once we have learned to distinguish it without fail from mere versification or the florid inanities of social commentary disguised as poesy.

Those of our readers who are advanced occultists and mystics will recognise that Mason Warden's poems contain several occult truths in a concealed manner; truths he may have been quite unconscious of when he wrote them and remain unconscious of until such time as he receives yet further and fuller illuminations.

This is not at all unusual as we discussed in part one of our investigation into the concealed wisdom in sublime poetry as well as in our articles on the esotericism in J. R. R. Tolkien's Lord of the Rings. In them we said that all great art is inspired from Above. The gifted poet, like the gifted musician or artist, receives his inspiration from the higher realms of Light and from the minds of those attuned to that Light as we may read in Vision Six of The Golden Star by J Michaud PhD.

In that chapter the ocean of spiritual fire in the Higher Realms whence inspiration flows into the minds of men is described as follows: "An ocean of Inspiration this. And if but one such tiny spark you see descends into a Poet's Mind, Lo! An immortal work will be created. His pen drips honey and ambrosia, and with a careless gesture he scatters jewelled thoughts, like stars, upon the Universe of other minds."

As we said earlier, there are few truly inspired poets who are conscious of the full meaning of what they set down in their moment of mental exaltation. For if they were they might be tempted to impose their own interpretation upon that which they have seen, heard or felt, and perhaps distort the purity and simplicity of the original spark of spiritual fire Dr Michaud describes. This is the reason why the true Poet is always humble, for deep within their mind is the knowledge of the Holy Source from which their inspiration flows. The opposite are those modern poetasters described in The Book of Sa-Heti:

"Behold the slobbering gutter poets, peering from their manholes, spewing sewer doggerel their bellies can no more retain; words without the slightest meaning; jumbles of words and stupid phrases, escaping from their lunatic minds, applauded by moronic fools who saw in this the new culture of the art of letters."

This is also inspiration of a kind, though perhaps 'disinspiration' would be a better word to describe the ugly, misshapen, trashy verbiage we encounter in the works of so many modern 'poets'. For as many of our readers know, there are Realms of Darkness and Sin below the earth, just as there are Realms of Light and Goodness above it and man is free to draw his inspiration from either source. We have no doubt whence Mason Warden drew the inspiration for his poems, and we pray that he may receive many more such blessings and share them with us.