The Enchanted Boat
In our afterword we examine some verses from Shelley's metaphysical drama—Prometheus Unbound—in which he describes his own 'voyage of discovery'. These verses contain a number of occult truths which we touched upon in a previous article and shall now explore in much greater depth.
We begin by quoting the verses from Shelley's poem that describes another magical voyage of discovery. A voyage that reprises many of the same themes as those Jack Samuel has woven into his story. Shelley's immortal poem and Jack Samuel's story both employ allegory and symbolism to convey certain hidden truths, for, as we discuss in our article on the Mystery Language, allegory was one of the earliest ways of communicating such truths in a symbolic manner.

The scriptures and sacred texts of all the ancient civilizations abound in allegories and parables. The Bible, the Puranas, the Persian Zend Avesta, and the old classics are full of them; but until H. P. Blavatsky began collecting and collating together those facts, which she later presented to the world in Isis Unveiled and The Secret Doctrine in the 19th century, the best theological, anthropological and scientific scholars were blind to the hidden meanings contained in these sacred texts.

Yet an allegory is simply a series of symbols intended to communicate certain spiritual truths and universal laws. Unless this is kept firmly in mind, Shelley's poem will remain merely a beautiful series of sentiments, the meaning of which is a closed book to the literally-minded. Here then are Shelley's sublime verses from Prometheus Unbound.

"My soul is an enchanted boat,
Which, like a sleeping swan, doth float
Upon the silver waves of thy sweet singing;
And thine doth like an angel sit
Beside a helm conducting it,
Whilst all the winds with melody are ringing.
It seems to float ever, forever,
Upon that many-winding river,
A paradise of wildernesses!
Till, like one in slumber bound,
Borne to the ocean, I float down, around,
Into a sea profound of ever-spreading sound.


"Meanwhile thy spirit lifts its pinions
In music's most serene dominions;
Catching the winds that fan that happy heaven.
And we sail on, away, afar,
Without a course, without a star,
But, by the instinct of sweet music driven;
Till through Elysian garden islets
By thee most beautiful of pilots,
Where never mortal pinnace glided,
The boat of my desire is guided;
Realms where the air we breathe is love,
Which in the winds on the waves doth move,
Harmonizing this earth with what we feel above.


"We have passed Age's icy caves,
And Manhood's dark and tossing waves,
And Youth's smooth ocean, smiling to betray;
Beyond the glassy gulfs we flee
Of shadow-peopled Infancy,
Through Death and Birth, to a diviner day;
A paradise of vaulted bowers
Lit by downward-gazing flowers,
And watery paths that wind between
Wildernesses calm and green,
Peopled by shapes too bright to see,
And rest, having beheld; somewhat like thee;
Which walk upon the sea, and chant melodiously!"

As we said in our article on this sublime poem, these verses describe the re-union of the human soul (Higher self in our terminology) with the true Soul from which it was seemingly separated during its many incarnations on earth.

No finer nor truer picture of the liberated Higher Self journeying through the Divine Light which illumines the higher Astral realms has ever been painted in verse, nor is ever likely to be. Shelley compares the Higher Self's spiritualised body to an enchanted boat which journeys through an opalescent ocean of bliss, dotted with verdant island paradises, emblematic of the various sections or divisions of the higher realms.

The 'Angel' who accompanies the Higher Self of the voyager and guides the progress of the 'boat' is the Divine Soul—the positive counterpart of the negative Higher Self discussed in our studies course article about the Soul. In the first verse Shelley tells us that the boat 'seems to float ever, forever, upon that many-winding river.' This has several meanings. It refers to the many cycles of our incarnations on earth. It refers to the time spent between incarnations, when we dwell for longer or shorter periods in the non-physical, but still material higher or lower realms.

For you should know, dear reader, that when we 'die' on earth we are reborn into that part of the Astral world with which we are most in tune, and from which we return again and again to earth. The more we grow in wisdom and understanding, the more glorious and refined that place becomes, until it truly resembles 'A paradise of wildernesses' as the Poet tells us. And what then?

Then, when we have finally learnt all the lessons material existence on earth has to teach us, we are 'borne to the ocean'—the higher Astral world—described so beautifully and truly in Vision Six of The Golden Star, from which we need not return to earth again, unless to willingly render some service or perform some task on behalf of our fellow human beings.

Note the reference to 'a sea profound of ever-spreading sound.' Here Shelley alludes in a concealed manner to the Voice of the Silence described by H. P. Blavatsky in her little book of that name. We may also regard that 'sound' as the Music of the Spheres mentioned in our article about the Magic of Music—the Divine Diapason of Heaven, heard by the pure in heart and mind in the silence of the within, never to be forgotten.

The beginning of the next verse confirms this interpretation with the line 'meanwhile thy spirit lifts its pinions, in music's most serene dominions; catching the winds that fan that happy heaven.' Could anything be plainer? But wait——what comes next seems a contradiction, for we now read: 'And we sail on, away, afar, without a course, without a star.' What on earth can this mean? Has our boat lost its pilot?

By no means, see what follows: 'But, by the instinct of sweet music driven.' In other words, our pilot—the true Soul—is still very much with us. It is the 'music' of our own Soul which guides our enchanted boat 'where never mortal pinnace glided'. For remember—this is a spiritual journey—not a material one. We are now in a higher realm of Light which no human, physical body can ever hope to reach.

The third and final verse is replete with hidden meaning. The Poet tells us that 'age's icy caves and Manhood's dark and tossing waves' have been left behind us. These things belong to the earth and its harsh tests and trials, which our voyager has overcome, and is now free to enter the wholly spiritualised life on High.

Note the reference to 'Youth's smooth ocean, smiling to betray.' Have we not all sailed on that stormy sea during many a lifetime on earth, buffeted by passions which promise much but deliver only broken dreams and lost loves? The Poet's 'glassy gulfs' remind us of the glitter and tinsel of the short-lived attractions of this world, so sooner had than hated, from which the wise flee, knowing they do not lead to freedom but further servitude on earth.

We know of few better descriptions of the illusory nature of life on earth than Shelley's 'shadow-peopled Infancy', through which we all must pass on our long journey from ignorance to knowledge and darkness to Light. Note too the sequence of Death and Birth and not the other way around as we might expect were the Poet simply talking about earthly life, rather than the life of the Higher Self after death has released it from the prison-house of the body.

This then, is the culmination of this grand drama; the ending of all sorrow and the beginning of the Life Immortal and Transcendent clothed in Light and Love. Our pilgrim now enters 'a paradise of vaulted bowers, lit by downward-gazing flowers, and watery paths that wind between, wildernesses calm and green, peopled by shapes too bright to see...' What magic there is in these sublime lines! Can you see the marvellous picture the Poet paints for us in your mind's eye?

We hope so, for this is the heritage of all Men, though few there are who seek it and fewer still who find it, being too busy playing the 'game of life' on earth to bother with the metaphysical abstractions Shelley and Jack Samuel have to teach us, the former in his immortal poem, and the latter in his moving voyage of discovery in which he finds the 'Great Pearl of Inner Peace.' May you, who reads this, find that precious jewel in God's good time. It is truly a treasure beyond all price to the possessor and a blessing that elevates, gladdens and comforts all it touches.

We would urge all our readers to study Shelley's sublime metaphysical masterpiece, for Prometheus is the grand emblem of spiritual Man imprisoned in a material body which has many important lessons to teach us. Lessons which it is necessary for us to learn if we wish to truly understand what Man is as a material and spiritual being, as well as his origin and destiny.