The two Selves
Afterword by Occult Mysteries
In his article the author calls Forgiveness a sublime virtue which comes to us from the higher self. We agree. The lower self never forgives. On the contrary, it craves vengeance and will repay the wrongs done to it to the uttermost farthing. But when the author talks about 'the small, quiet voice of our higher selves' we have to be careful, for there are two inner voices which prompt us, and each pulls in the opposite direction! So we must learn to distinguish one from the other.

An infallible indication as to which mind has the upper hand at any time is that the higher mind speaks from the heart. The lower mind mostly attempts to interpret it in words or images and usually fails to adequately express the thoughts of its better half. The more heartfelt the thought, the less the lower mind can interpret it, hence the mess of so-called 'occult' teachings in the world today—the fruits of the speculations and fantasies of generations of lower minds.

But this does not mean the lower mind should be despised and ignored. That would be to throw out the baby (lower mind) AND the bath water (thinking)! If we may use a musical analogy, the sonorous deep quality of the Bass (lower mind) should augment and enhance the Treble theme (higher mind) and vice versa. If you listen to a musical composition of true genius such as Mozart's Jupiter symphony (K551) or Bach's Toccata and Fugue, you will be inspired and enchanted by the blending of the lower and higher mind elements.

But if we restrict or restrain the lower Bass accompaniment we develop cacophony, or at best a one-sided, perhaps one-stringed disembodied melody. Translate this idea into any other artistic, scientific or intellectual form of expression and you will have a perfect picture of the two minds' dependence and interdependence on each other. What would Rembrandt's masterpieces be without their interblending of light and shade?

When we stop treating the lower mind as an obstacle to spiritual progress and regard it as inherited blessing which we must use to express the gifts we have been given by our Creator to play our individual part in the grand symphony of evolution, a great change takes place within us.

But before the lower mind can accept the guidance of the higher it is necessary to give it the opportunity to compare the Light with the darkness, just as the author of this article on the power of forgiveness has done and is doing; just as each one of us is doing every single day of our lives. For it is only through trial and error, or by experiencing so-called good and evil that both minds can evolve to ever higher and greater states of consciousness.

Some occultists and mystics regard the lower mind as a BEAST. This is true when we consider examples of the lower mind at its worst. We don't mean Hitler or Stalin. No, we were thinking of famous artists like Benvenuto Cellini or Lord Byron. If you read their biographies you will see just how much of a beast the lower mind can be when given free reign. Cellini had a foul temper and murderous impulses which nearly cost him his life on more than one occasion. Yet he was a sculptor and jeweller of supreme genius whose artworks have never been surpassed. Byron used and abused his friends and enemies in the most calculating and selfish manner, yet was also one of the finest poets of all time.

There can be no other explanation for such extremes of virtue and vice in one man than the presence and operation of two minds—the higher and the lower. This leads to an interesting conjecture. As no two human beings are the same in any way, physically, mentally or emotionally, neither can the lower mind be. Some must be more or less selfish than others, some gentler, even wiser than others, each according to its nature and the lessons it has learnt. If we look into the lives of the poets Shelley and Keats we find very different lower minds at work than in Cellini or Byron. Shelley and Keats were both generous to a fault, gentle in manners and speech, and forgave their many enemies and critics.

But are such lower minds easier to live with than Cellini's or Byron's? We are reminded of a precocious child and its proud parent, who will insist upon sharing everything with their child, expecting and encouraging it to respond in ways in which it is quite incapable of doing. Have we not all met such parents? In attempting to imitate its better half such a lower mind risks becoming a second-rate higher mind, rather than a first-rate lower mind, the first and most important duty of which is to care for the physical body and keep it in good repair as long as it is needed.

One thing is certain, whatever combination of minds we happen to possess, once the higher mind consciously tries to control the lower, the sparks fly! We discussed this in our article on Inner Peace through applied Wisdom, of which this afterword is a continuation and further elucidation. If you combine all this with the information given in our occult studies course, you will have a much more complete picture of the two minds and their operation and interdependence.