The Holy Daemon
In the afterword to my article I discuss the nature of our Holy Daemon, or tutelary genius, and analyse the fable of Cupid & Psyche
The sheer number of superstitions and confused beliefs centred around the idea of a personal or tutelary daemon is truly astonishing. From the various schools of Platonic interpreters, through the Christian conceptions of the Holy Guardian Angel, to the rank luxuriance of magical grimoires with their daemonic conjurations—the idea of the personal daemon has evolved throughout the ages into something strange, fantastic, and at times utterly bewildering.

Various so-called 'magical' schools are especially rife with prolixious formulas and odd rituals purportedly designed to bring the practitioner into rapport with his or her holy Daemon. There is for instance the infamous Book of Abramelin, which presents the eager adept with an involved 18-month long ritual for achieving communion with his 'Holy Guardian Angel'. Another ritual guarantees success in as little as four weeks, during which the practitioner is required to reduce sleep, food consumption and communication to a minimum, to the point of utter exhaustion, all the while performing prayers and ceremonials to none other than the deity of Saturn.

This sounds like a sure-fire recipe for attuning with the lower realms of darkness to me, but whether it can summon your Guardian Angel, or something rather less amiable—if not downright dangerous—I should not like to say. All this shows the importance of understanding the principles we are dealing with, and at the very least, the difference between attunement with the higher beings, and the conjuration of lower elementals. This is something that the ancient Theurgists such as Iamblichus and Proclus knew well, for their laws forbade any commerce with the lower classes of spirits, who are quite adept at impersonating 'benevolent' forces, and love nothing better than making mischief!

Such befuddled ideas are the reason why some people have often been led to believe that their personal Daemon is something to be feared, or a presence which must of necessity appear out of darkness like some shadowy phantom, and that man cannot control whether he is a subject of a bad or a good daemon. What utter rubbish! But before we start throwing mud at the misguided ambitions of some would-be magicians, some of whom may mean well, let us investigate what exactly hides behind this archaic idea of a personal Guardian Angel, or tutelary genius.

As my starting point, I will take up a rather famous passage from Plato's Timaeus and endeavour to interpret it in the light of our philosophical illuminations: "And besides, as such a one always cultivates that which is divine, and has a daemon most excellently adorned residing in his essence, he must be happy in the most eminent degree." By 'such a one' Plato here means a Philosopher. But what exactly does he mean by the phrase 'has a daemon most excellently adorned'?

Daemons, as I have already explained in my article at left, are an order of intermediate beings placed between terrestrial and celestial habitations. In other words, the 'middle natures', suspended between the divine perfection of the Gods and the world of earthly generation. They are divided into various classes and sub-classes, some of which correspond with Nature Spirits and Devas, and others with the beings referred to in Theosophical teachings as Dhyan-Chohans.

Porphyry mentions three main divisions of daemons, two of which are 'bodiless'. The third class are clothed with 'vapoury bodies'. Elementaries, or disembodied humans in other words. This is corroborated by Apuleius in his treatise On the God of Socrates, where he mentions a lower order of daemons, called Lemures, a class of human souls which, after departure from their present life, do not enter into another body. We can identify these 'human souls' with lower minds which, generally speaking, are gradually dissolved after death into their own element. Apuleius goes on to explain that some of these Lemures, dwell peacefully in a house as a 'familiar' or 'domestic'; but some, whom he calls Larvae, having no proper habitation on account of the evil deeds their erstwhile personalities committed during life, become wandering, disembodied 'shells', noxious to living men.

But there exists a still higher distribution of daemons who also once existed in a human body, and who, on account of their just and prudent lives as men, were sometimes called Manes—most likely derived from the Sanskrit word 'Manas', or Egyptian 'Manes', which in both cases stand for the Higher Mind. These are often celebrated by men as divinities and Heroes, and honoured by religious rites. Apuleius observes that "the upright desire of the soul is a good daemon," and the blessed whose minds were perfect in virtue were called eudaemones, meaning 'the daemon of whom is good.' This perceptive philosopher further states: "this God (or daemon), who is the mind of every one, though it is immortal, nevertheless, is after a certain manner generated with man."

So we see that there is also a certain distribution of daemons which consists of Higher Minds, just as certain classes of Devas or Dhyan-Chohans do. But can we really say that the celebrated daemon of Socrates, who guided him throughout his life but never urged him to any action, warning him instead on select occasions when he was about to say or do something undesirable, can we say that it was simply his highly evolved Higher Mind? Or that, when Plato speaks of 'a daemon most excellently adorned,' he too only means an exalted Higher Mind? I think not, and I will try to explain why.

Plato and his followers assigned various meanings to certain terms, and a daemon for them, in the broadest sense, simply designated a middle, connecting nature. It is true that, as Proclus shows in his Theology of Plato, the later Platonists made a distinction between beings which are essentially daemons, and those which are considered to be daemons through similitude, or according to habitude (proximity or alliance). This is a fascinating subject which deserves a separate treatise. For now, let it suffice that Plato frequently uses the terms 'daemons' and 'Gods' interchangeably. Hermes the Greek God (not to be confused with the Egyptian Hermes) is at one point called a Daemon on account of his being a Messenger between Gods and men.

Similarly, Eros, or Love, can also be viewed as a Daemon, for Love is essentially of a daemoniacal character. It is the power of Love that connects the lover with his Beloved, and mortals with immortal Beauty. This of course in no way prevented the ancients from worshipping Eros as a primordial God, for he was both, and more, as I have already established elsewhere.

But there is also a species of Daemons which Apuleius designates as "more sublime and venerable, and not less numerous, but far superior in dignity, who, being always liberated from the bonds and conjunction of the body, preside over certain powers," and he counts Love in their ranks. It is in that 'more sublime and venerable' order of Daemons that we must also place the Soul—which never enters into bodies, and presides over the Higher Mind, its negative counterpart. With this key, the meaning of Plato and Apuleius becomes clear.

We can now expand on our initial definition and state the following: that daemons are assigned the role of binding together the divine and mortal natures and of mediating between different states of being. Daemons therefore can be said to contain all three schemes of evolution in their ranks: the Spiritual (i.e. Souls), the Mental or Intellectual (Higher Minds) and the Astral-Physical (the irrational souls, or lower minds). This would correspond with the division of their ranks given by Porphyry and Apuleius.

Who or what then is that invisible guardian, the ever-present, all-seeing and all-hearing arbitrator of man's thoughts and deeds? Porphyry, in his Life of Plotinus states expressly that the individual soul (Higher Mind) is the leading guardian daemon of every man. Yet it is not, as we have seen from our investigation so far, the only 'guardian angel'. We can have many such guardians accompanying us in our sojourn on earth, our former companions, lovers, family members or even teachers, varying in their descent and wisdom. But there is only one who is truly divine, and resides in our highest essence and that is our own Soul, sometimes called the Silent Watcher and our Spiritual Witness.

It is now possible to interpret Plato's words as follows: "Such a one," as I have already suggested, refers to a man or woman who desires to acquire Wisdom; a true Philosopher in other words. Such a Philosopher "always cultivates that which is divine" by his constant attunement with the Soul, through which his Higher Mind is nourished, purified and elevated. "A daemon most excellently adorned residing in his essence" is his very own Soul, which resides in its own realm, in utter and inconceivable glory.

To be "happy in most eminent degree" means to be freed from the evils of rebirth on earth, and to be in continual possession of good. In the words of J Michaud: "No man can make himself wholly pure and wise: for without the aid of his Angel he is as a pebble in the desert-sands beneath the elephant's foot." This, I believe, is the true nature of our Holy Daemon, that Guardian Angel, of whom Dante writes in his Divine Comedy: "When thou shalt be before the radiance sweet, of her whose beauteous eyes all things behold, from her thou'lt know the journey of thy life."

Truly, contact and communion with our Divine Watcher can bring clarity and vision, which remove all doubts and obstacles on our pathway Home. But how to achieve this contact, without resorting to mortifying penance or the dubious magical rites I mentioned earlier? How can we know that we are communing with our holy guardian, and not with the evil genius, whether the latter is simply our own lower mind, or some other negative entity we have attuned with?

Let us once more listen to that wise woman, Madame Blavatsky: "The closer the approach to one's Prototype 'in Heaven' the better for the mortal whose personality was chosen, by his own personal deity (the seventh principle), as its terrestrial abode. For, with every effort of will toward purification and unity with that 'Self-god', one of the lower rays breaks and the spiritual entity of man is drawn higher and ever higher to the ray that supersedes the first, until, from ray to ray, the inner man is drawn into the one and highest beam of the Parent-SUN."

This sounds very much like the advice given to us by Plato and Dr Michaud, which I discussed in connection with Eros earlier: purify your desires, turn your eyes to the supernal Beauty, and reach out to it with every fibre of your being, for only thus can you attune with your Prototype in Heaven. The Master Key that opens up this blessing is the cultivation of Inner Peace.

Blavatsky continues: "Yes; 'our destiny is written in the stars!' Only, the closer the union between the mortal reflection MAN and his celestial PROTOTYPE, the less dangerous the external conditions and subsequent reincarnations—which neither Buddhas nor Christs can escape...Those who believe in Karma have to believe in destiny, which, from birth to death, every man is weaving thread by thread around himself, as a spider does his cobweb; and this destiny is guided either by the heavenly voice of the invisible prototype outside of us, or by our more intimate astral, or inner man, who is but too often the evil genius of the embodied entity called man. Both these lead on the outward man, but one of them must prevail; and from the very beginning of the invisible affray the stern and implacable law of compensation steps in and takes its course, faithfully following the fluctuations."

We can safely substitute Karma with the word 'Attunement', for that is the true meaning of this Law as the authors of Occult Mysteries explain in their article on this misunderstood doctrine. As for the rest, it seems to confirm the conclusion that only one genius can prevail. Whether it be the Genius of Love or the genius of lust and sloth, every single one of us has the free Will to decide.

Now, let us briefly examine the fable of Cupid and Psyche to see if we can derive some benefit from attempting to interpret its occult meaning. As I have mentioned previously, Cupid was a Roman name for Eros, while Psyche stood for rational soul. For those of you unfamiliar with the fable, you can easily find it online, see the Further reading list at the end of this sidebar.

The story of Cupid and Psyche is a symbolical representation of the history and progress of the human soul, or Higher Mind. This soul, which is of Divine Origin, is here below subjected to error in its prison, the body. Hence trials and purifications are set before it, that it may become capable of a higher order of things, and of true desire. It is confronted with two loves: the earthly or material, a daemon who draws it down to earthly things; and the heavenly or spiritual, a holy daemon who directs its view to the Original, fair and divine, and who, gaining the victory, leads off the soul as his bride.

From the beginning of the story, Psyche is described as being transcendently beautiful. This is true of every Higher Mind before it descends into matter. In the next place, Psyche is represented as descending from the summit of a lofty mountain into a beautiful valley, which signifies the descent of the Higher Mind from the spheres of pristine purity into a lower condition of being, but without abandoning its original relation to the heavens. Hence the Palace which Psyche beholds in the valley is with great propriety said to be "a royal house, which was not raised by human but by divine hands and art." This description is reminiscent of the 'World of Astral Fire', portrayed so beautifully by J Michaud in Vision 6 of The Golden Star.

The gems, too, on which Psyche is said to have trod in every part of this Palace, are evidently symbolical of the stars. Of this mundane yet celestial condition of being, the incorporeal Voices which attended upon Psyche are likewise symbolical; they are the celestial harmonies of the spheres. Psyche, in this delightful situation, is married to an invisible Being, whom she alone recognises by her ears and hands. This unseen husband proves afterwards to be Cupid, or Love; that is to say, the Higher Mind, while established in the heavens, is united to love of the purest kind: spiritual love, or in other words, love exempt from the fascination of outward form.

But in this beautiful Palace she is attacked by the machinations of her two sisters, who endeavour to persuade her to explore the form of her unknown husband. These sisters signify the powers of the irrational soul, or the lower mind, and Cupid warns Psyche about the danger of hearkening to their evil counsel. "May I suffer death an hundred times rather than be deprived of thy most pleasing embraces," answers Psyche, "for I love thee most vehemently, thee, whoever thou art, even as I love my own soul, nor would I compare thee to Cupid himself." The emphasis is mine, for it is in just such subtle ways that the true identity of Psyche's husband, her own Soul, the Eros himself, is occultly concealed.

The stratagems of these two sisters at length take effect and Psyche, by the light of the night lamp, beholds her sleeping husband and falls in love with Love. That is to say, the rational part, through the incentives of the passions of the lower mind, becomes enamoured of and captivated with outward form; in consequence of which Cupid, or Spiritual Love, flies away, and Psyche, or the rational soul is precipitated to earth. This indicates the separation of the Higher Mind from its divine counterpart, and incarnation in a physical body.

After this, Psyche begins her search for Cupid from whose embraces she is unhappily torn away. She makes a supplication of the goddesses Ceres and Juno, which is appropriate to her condition, for both stand for the selfsame Spirit of Divine Motherhood. But Venus (or Aphrodite), who is the mother of Cupid, has already sent Hermes, the Messenger, in pursuit of the fugitive. It is likewise said that she gave him a small volume, in which the name of Psyche was written, and every other particular respecting her.

It seems that Synesius alludes to this part of the fable in his treatise On Dreams, where he speaks of the descent of the Higher Mind with the intent to accomplish a certain servitude to the Nature of the Universe (symbolised by Venus), prescribed by the laws of Fate. Thus when we become enamoured with the corporeal allurements of Matter, its false appearances and fascinations, she marks our assent in her secret book; "and if, considering ourselves free, we at any time determine to depart, she proclaims us deserters, and endeavours to bring us back; and openly presenting her Mystic Volume to the view, apprehends us fugitives from our mistress," adds Synesius. This poetically symbolises the power which the attractions of corporeal beauty exert upon us, and the difficulty with which we must shake off our affections for it, falling into its snares time and again, often despite our best efforts.

The Venus mentioned in the Fable was not, however, Celestial Venus, or Supreme Beauty; for the latter separates the pure soul from all sensual inclination; but the earthly one binds the impure soul as her legitimate slave to a corporeal life. After this follows an account of the difficult tasks which Psyche is obliged to execute by the commands of Venus, all of which are emblematical of the tests and trials which the Higher self must necessarily endure after its lapse, in order to recover its ancient residence in the celestial worlds.

In accomplishing the last of these labours, Psyche is represented as forced to descend even to the dark regions of Hades, which indicates that the Higher Mind, through being enslaved to a corporeal life, becomes situated in obscurity, and is deprived of the light of day, that is, of the splendour of Truth and Reality.

In returning from Hades Psyche is oppressed with a profound sleep, caused by her indiscreetly opening the box given her by Proserpine, in which she expected to find a portion of Divine Beauty, but is met instead with nothing but an infernal Stygian potion. This allegory signifies that the Higher Mind, by expecting to find that which is truly beautiful in a corporeal and terrene life, passes into a profoundly dormant state.

Cupid, however, or Spiritual Love at length recovering his pristine vigour, rouses Psyche, or the rational part of her nature, from her deadly lethargy. In consequence of this, having accomplished her destined toils, she ascends to her native heavens, becomes lawfully united to Cupid, lives the life of the immortals, and the natural result of this union is pleasure and everlasting delight. As we may read in the fable: "He ordered Mercury to bring Psyche to Heaven; and as soon as she was arrived, extending to her a cup of ambrosia, 'Take this,' said he, 'Psyche, and be immortal; nor shall Cupid ever depart from thy embrace, but these nuptials of yours shall be perpetual.' "

All this alludes to the ancient Egyptian Mystery of Tattu, or the union of the twin souls: the soul in matter, and the soul in spirit. The former represented by Horus the Younger and the latter by Horus the Elder, which I touched upon in the main part of this investigation. This is the Alchemical Marriage that was reproduced by the ancient Greeks in the Fable of Cupid or Eros and Psyche; of the Divine Soul and the Higher Mind, re-united as one complete being.