The science of death

Afterword by Occult Mysteries
Occult science affirms that there is no such thing as death for any created being, only change from one form of consciousness to another. In this afterword we shall briefly consider what two truly great occultists had to say about death: J Michaud PhD and H. P. Blavatsky, whose writings have been the inspiration for this website and the foundation of much of our content.

In The Quest of Ruru by J Michaud PhD, which luminous story of one seeker's path to the Light we have published in full on this website, the eponymous candidate for initiation asks his teacher where the dead go.

One day he asked: "Where do the dead dwell, dear Master?"

Narāda replied: "A dead person is in his deeds."

"How can that be?" asked Ruru.

"Whatsoever a man attunes with," replied the Master, "that he becomes. The cruel person will depart, or sink down, to the regions where dwell the tormentors of the lower worlds. The indifferent or the lazy one will be blotted out, or sleep for an eternity. The inspired Dreamer of Beatitudes and the master of poesy, both under the afflatus of supernatural exaltation, endowed with superhuman insight, will rise to the worlds of their vision.

"The lover will meet the beloved again in golden regions beneath rose and amethystine clouds in azure skies, the landscape full of silver streams delectable, with everlasting flowers in every hue imaginable, and perfumed trees with luscious fruits, with verdant hills and crystal waterfalls and glittering meres and pools in realms of reverie and happiness such as this earth can never know, away from spying eyes, the two alone in utter ecstasy of perfect union.

"The Sage will soar to kingdoms far beyond the ken of lower men, to meet his peers and dwell in wisdom, expanding in ever-widening circles of sublimity—One with the Gods for ever.

"Thus all will live, or be, within their deeds . . . or in their dreams . . . or cease to BE if it is so decided by the Lords. But to some these deeds or dreams will be an actual AWAKENING to a higher awareness, which can no more return to sleep. This is true of those whose Path leads to the golden region of the Sun. They need never return to earth, unless by willing acts of sacrifice. The rest go to the region of the Moon.

"The indifferent, the lazy, the blasphemous will pass behind it, never to return as human beings perhaps; the rest will dwell in lovely shires, awaiting fresh re-birth."

In The Key to Theosophy, H. P. Blavatsky tells us: "For long ages, one generation of Adepts after another has studied the mysteries of being, of life, death, and re-birth, and all have taught in their turn some of the facts so learned." She goes on to say: "At the solemn moment of death every man, even when death is sudden, sees the whole of his past life marshalled before him, in its minutest details. For one short instant the personal becomes one with the individual and all-knowing Ego (Higher Self in our terminology). But this instant is enough to show to him the whole chain of causes which have been at work during his life. He sees and now understands himself as he is, unadorned by flattery or self-deception."

There is much comfort in what Blavatsky says in her Collected Writings about the moment of death. "While physical memory in a healthy living man is often obscured, one fact crowding out another weaker one, at the moment of the great change that man calls death—that which we call "memory" seems to return to us in all its vigour and freshness Through our 'soul' (Higher Self in our terminology) it is then that we see, clearer and still clearer, as we approach the end; and it is through the throbs of dissolution that horizons of vaster, profounder knowledge are drawn on, bursting upon our mental vision, and becoming with every hour plainer to our inner eye.

"Otherwise, how account for those bright flashes of memory, for the prophetic insight that comes as often to the enfeebled grandsire, as to the youth who is passing away? The Nearer some approach death, the brighter becomes their long lost memory and the more correct the pre-visions. The unfoldment of the inner faculties increases as life-blood become more stagnant."

This was written many years before the term 'near-death experience (NDE) was first coined and confirms the testimonies cited by Greg Wade in his article of those who have 'died' and come back to life. In the same book Blavatsky gives the following advice to the bereaved:

"Speak in whispers, ye, who assist at a death-bed and find yourselves in the solemn presence of Death. Especially have you to keep quiet just after Death has laid her clammy hand upon the body. Speak in whispers, I say, lest you disturb the quiet ripple of thought, and hinder the busy work of the Past casting its reflection upon the Veil of the Future."

We end this afterword with a verse from The Book of Sa-Heti by J Michaud PhD:

"He (the initiate) knows that life is an illusion, a dream, and death an awakening to worse or better life."