The narrow way
In our customary afterword we examine the difficulties the seeker faces on the path to the Light.
The first thing we would say is that we do not think it is necessary to go wrong in every way in our pursuit of truth and meaning, although most of us do in some way or another, as the author did, and as the subject of John Temple's first article did too. The unpalatable fact, as Kurt Flaxman learnt, is that Truth can only be recognised and ultimately known, through bitter experience.

It is for this reason, as well as others, that the study of the real occult sciences, as opposed to the pseudo occultism and magic that passes for them in the popular mind, attracts so very few. But why should the search for Truth involve suffering? Because suffering, patiently borne, ennobles the mind. Some would argue that it degrades the mind and that there is no nobility in poverty, sickness or despair. This is true, but is it not also true that it is not only circumstances that cause the greatest suffering, but also our attitude toward them?

Many eminent men and women have pulled themselves out of the most appalling conditions and overcome bitter suffering to achieve greatness in one way or another. Gerald Massey, whose books we recommend so warmly on our website, is a classic example of just such heroic men and women. Massey's parents were poor, illiterate peasants. At just eight years of age, he had to earn his living in a silk factory working 12 hours a day, and when that burnt down, he took up the equally laborious toil of straw plaiting. As he says himself: "I had no childhood. Ever since I can remember, I have had the aching fear of want, throbbing heart and brow. The currents of my life were early poisoned, and few, methinks, would pass unscathed through the scenes and circumstances in which I have lived."

Despite these difficulties and almost insurmountable obstacles, Massey taught himself to read and write and went on to learn Greek, Hebrew and ancient Egyptian hieroglyphs. His poetry was praised by no lesser luminary than Alfred Lord Tennyson, and his life's work was devoted to rescuing the High Wisdom of ancient Egypt from the stygian darkness into which it had fallen. His contemporary, the writer and social reformer, Samuel Smiles, said of him: "Massey was a man of vivid genius, full of the true poetic fire, who blessed and glorified his race."

Of course, not all of us are Gerald Massey, nor are we suggesting that it is necessary to suffer in order to achieve greatness, or simply to make a success of life. But is it not true that bitter experience, as we said earlier, is a surer teacher than well-meant advice or good example can ever be? Need we enlarge on this? You may tell a child a hundred times not to play with matches, but let it burn itself only once and it is a very odd child indeed who would wish to repeat the experience!

The same applies to the search for Truth. We are pretty certain Kurt Flaxman will not be taking ayahuasca again or consulting Shamans. But is the same true of those who may read his story or our article on the dangers of Shamanism and mind-altering drugs? If seeing is believing—and we have no doubt it is—then experience is the true teacher par excellence. Those who compiled the Gospel of Matthew in the New Testament were only too well aware of this or they would not have put the following words into the mouth of Jesus.

"Because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it" (Matthew 7:14). Strait is not a misspelling of 'straight' as some imagine, but an archaic word meaning 'strict', 'difficult' and 'rigorous'. We still use it today in such familiar phrases as "he was in dire straits"—meaning in great difficulty. It must be obvious to all but the most literal-minded that by 'life' Jesus did not mean our material earthly existence, but Life Eternal, which can only be attained through spiritual illumination and enlightenment, or initiation if you prefer.

The next six verses confirm that this is the right interpretation: "Beware of false prophets, which come to you in sheep's clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves. Ye shall know them by their fruits. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? Even so every good tree bringeth forth good fruit; but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit. A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire. Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them."

What a pity these verses are not better known and understood, especially the last of them—"Wherefore by their fruits..." Had Kurt Flaxman really understood this verse he would have known that the Shaman who taught him such a bitter experience was a 'false prophet'. Such blind leaders of the blind don't necessarily come to us in 'sheep's clothing', though many do, nor are they all 'ravening wolves' within. Some, like the blind guide in the author's story, may mean well, but as the well-known proverb teaches us, the road to Hell is paved with good intentions, whilst Virgil in his Aeneid says "the descent to hell is easy" (facilis descensus Averno). To which we would add "because wide is the gate, and easy is the way, which leadeth unto death, and many there be that find it." Death, of course, being a synonym for ignorance and slavery on earth, whereas Life is a synonym for wisdom on high and liberation from rebirth on earth.

You won't find that verse in the Bible, nor does the genuine Teacher dwell upon the difficulties the seeker after Truth is sure to encounter when he enters the strait gate and narrow way. For if he spelled out even a fraction of the tests and trials the neophyte must undergo to reach his goal, the precious few disciples he may gather around him would soon become none at all. The question this is leading up to is this: can anything be done to mitigate the bitter experiences the seeker can expect, or is he or she doomed to suffer anyway? Yes and no.

In the Golden Verses attributed to him, the Greek philosopher and occult adept, Pythagoras says: "I would have thee know that men draw their own misfortunes upon themselves of their own free will and their own free choice. Unhappy wretches all! They neither see nor understand that their God is near to them." We are sure Kurt Flaxman would not disagree with these words, unpalatable as they may be. We certainly wouldn't when we look back over all the really stupid choices we made in the past that brought misfortune and suffering upon us. As we say in our occult studies course article on Magic, "free will is truly a terrible responsibility, but a necessary one for the growth of the Divine mind within us."

By 'their God' Pythagoras is clearly hinting at the existence of the Higher Mind within us which has the free will to listen to the voice of the Divine Soul or the insinuating chatter of the lower mind and body. The choice is ours. This provides the answer to the dilemma of suffering. None of us need suffer, but if we truly wish to grow as human beings in the way in which the Creators intend, then we will suffer in some way or another. As the Divine Mind grows ever stronger within us we are less likely to choose unwisely, and so our suffering will decrease accordingly, until the day comes when we need no longer return to this veil of tears, for it will have no more lessons to teach us and we shall behold God's Pure Truth unobscured in all its radiant Beauty and Sublimity.