The Kosmos
Afterword by Occult Mysteries
This afterword has been adapted from Vision 8 of The Golden Star, which describes the formation of the Kosmos, which in occult scientific terminology means a Solar System.

The first requisite in the building of a Kosmos is the creation of the Auric Envelope. This is a material projection from God's spiritual mind; an image, a thought-form; obtaining material shape and substance by means of God's Will, which dwells in the Divine Light, from the radiance of which—it being in perpetual motion—comes the Breath, whence emanates the primordial Light in which is manifested Eternal Thought concealed in darkness; and this becomes the WORD of Creation.

From this Word, or Mantram, not only the Auric Envelope, but the whole Kosmos comes into manifestation. For within the Envelope the Concealed Logos radiates a Ray which fructifies the germs of Sun and Planets in formation; and the Essence of this Ray expands, giving birth to Planetary Logoi, from whose Minds all things are born.

Before the Planets are made there is Chaos; all the Essences of the future material worlds being in a state of flux; unformed. These are the "Waters over which brooded the Spirit of God" mentioned in Genesis, and all is darkness, needing the Breath of God to become Light. As the Auric Shell is lit up by that Light, the Word rings forth and comes into manifestation by the act of generation or production. What seems chaos to the human intellect is the eternal Root of Spiritual Wisdom.

In this—the Waters of Life—are created, or re-awakened the primordial germs by means of the primordial Light. Thus, the Divine Spirit moves on the Waters of Space within the Auric Envelope and fructifies and infuses the Breath of Life into that germ, which becomes the centre in which the male planetary Logos is created; and from this the first Lord of Beings emerges and becomes the progenitor of mankind.

This latter Lord is not the Absolute and Unknown Deity who contains the Universe within Himself, but a Logos who is connected with the procreation of species of a Planet or Globe. He becomes the Father of All, and between Him and the Infinite Deity stretches an Abyss; the Great Deep; the Great Mystery. And between Him and the Supreme Deity, there is the Hidden Logos; the Lord of that Kosmos.

The Universe is worked from within outwards. Every external motion, act or gesture, whether voluntary or mechanical, organic or mental, is produced and preceded by internal feeling or emotion, will or volition, and thought or mind. So also is the whole Kosmos guided and controlled, and animated by an almost endless series of Hierarchies of sentient Beings, each having a mission to perform as agents of the Cosmic Laws.

The genesis of Gods and men takes rise from one and the same Point; which is the One Universal, Eternal and Absolute Unity. In the sphere of objectivity and Physics it becomes Primordial Substance and Force; male and female. In Metaphysics it becomes the Spirit of the Universe, or Cosmic Ideation; sometimes called the Logos; who is the apex of the Pythagorean Triangle.

The first condensation of Kosmic Matter took place about a central nucleus, its parent Sun; but our Sun (as well as all the other planets later on) detached itself from the rotating mass of that parent Sun as it contracted, and he is therefore the elder brother of the planets—being the first-born—and not their Father.

After the Ray drops into the great Kosmic Depths at the first thrill of the new Dawn, it re-emerges as the New Life to be until the end of that Kosmic Cycle; the Germ of all things and Beings; the generator of Light and Life; the Blazing Dragon of Wisdom; the Word, the Thought Divine. He who bathes in this Light but once will never again be deceived by the Veil of Illusion. The Germ of all things—the World Germ—is that matter which consists of spiritual particles, or supersensuous matter, existing in a state of primeval differentiation. In Theogony every seed is an eternal organism, from which evolves later on a Celestial Being—a God.

For this reason the divinely inspired Philolaus, the Pythagorean said that: "The sun is the mirror of Fire, the splendour of whose flames by their reflection in that mirror is poured upon us, and that splendour we call image." Thus he referred in a hidden, or occult manner to the central, spiritual Sun, whose beams and effulgence are only mirrored by the central star of the Kosmos—our visible Sun.