Wisdom and Folly

Afterword by Occult Mysteries
The final paragraphs of the author's moving letter reminds us of a line from J. R. R Tolkien's —The Lord of the Rings—in which the Wizard Gandalf tells Frodo at their parting on the shores of Middle-earth: "I will not say: do not weep; for not all tears are an evil."

Those of our readers who have been blessed with a similar revelation to that related by the author, will know that the inward truth of such experiences cannot be expressed in words nor communicated to others, for they are, as she rightly says, part of our "unique relationship with the Supreme Creator."

So it is fitting that our afterword should include a collection of sayings about Wisdom and folly loosely adapted from the books of J Michaud PhD, principally The Teachings of Li Wang Ho. We hope you will enjoy and profit from them as much as we have enjoyed and profited from the author's remarkable letter.

"All men are Fools, and fools only have wisdom if they know they are fools. The rest are still fools—only more so: for they do not know it. On the other hand when a fool in his foolishness is happy it is cruel to make him wise before the appointed time. Better a happy Fool than a miserable Sage."

"It is said that the Planets are the eyes of the Heavenly Lords. So it is no wonder they twinkle when beholding the follies of Man."

"But as Wisdom pursueth the Wise, so do the ignorant run after folly. The home of Wisdom is in Heaven; the home of Folly is upon the earth: which is thy choice, O, Seeker?"

"We learn more from the failures of fools than from the successes of the wise. But when a fool commences to argue, it is better to be silent."

"A vain man resembles a blind peacock who has lost all his feathers but still struts about proudly in the nakedness of his ugliness and the lack of decent covering for his ineptitude . . . . which, being blind, he cannot discern. The stupid regard him with scorn; the wise behold him with a smile. But he knows neither scorn nor smile in the blindness of his vanity—and stalks along with vapid mien."

"The wise hide their tongues within their hearts, and the stupid carry their hearts upon their tongues. To upbraid a foolish person is greater foolishness still, for it is like the Buddha of clay preaching to the Buddha of mud. It is as much a waste of time as battering in an open door, and so it is waste of time if those not yet rich in diligent wisdom try to improve those who have an abundance of indifferent sense."

"To fools, almost anyone who does things in a different or unusual way without offending another may seem to be a superior sort of person. But the fools produced by the creators are very strange beings whose intellect is darkened by the clouds of shame and ignorance."